Pembe Kayran - (wife of Ibrahim Kayran)			4/7/95She is now working around the house. Her three sons and their wives are visiting with them...Pembe is cooking, making jam, cheese, yoghurt, butter from cream etc...All daughters-in-law are helping out...She washes the cream with water after separating it from its “ayran”, salts it with rock salt, collects it in a ceramic jar with lid...She is from Beylikköprü..Her family went there from a village near Sivrihisar, Eskisehir. She is Suna Köseoglu’s cousin.Right after the Sakarya War, 1921-22, her family went to Beylikköprü, from the earlier nearby village of Bebi. There, they formed about 4-5 families. BK was a convenient place, it had a train station. Her father was an AGA, there. Lots of herds and farmland...My father had been both a farmer and a herder.. No sugar beet then..We had surplus wheat which was sold to TMO (state). I was and hired shepherds, maids, laborers etc...I was not yet born when my parents came here. We had lots of horses, sheep, cattle....They were able to sell their milk produce by train to Ankara...So, they became very well to do. My mother worked very hard, even though she had plenty of help.I was 16, Ibrahim was 19 when we were married...we were engaged, then married; after he came back from Military service, we really settled down in YH..At 17 I had my first daughter (she has 5 kids)....As a young married woman, I was very pressed...”Ben hep asker yolunu bekliyordum... Kayinlar tarafindan eziliyorsun...In farming, there is no sitting down. I have been working constantly.Bazen sıkıcı oluyor. Cannot even leave for a week...(They don’t have sheep).They have c.300 dönüm.... They don’t want to sharecrop, because that woulddecrease income.. All their kids, except the youngest son, Önder, is living with them, and he helps them with farming.. He is a graduate of faculty of farming at Bursa Uludag Univ. Herding is decreasing, because grazing land is little. Sheep cannot be cooped up, like cows...Sheep have to walk, that’s his way of growing and producing milk...We will probably revert to only cows.. easier to take care of..don’t have to travel long distances...Cow milk is also cheaper, 15,000 TL.Sheep milk is 40,000TL. Shepherds are very expensive..Mixed farming can be a very profitable way of life, if labor is available, especially if family members could all work together...Taxes are high, labor is expensive, water and electricity are high...everything requires payment...Instead of “tezek” we have to use coal for heat... 