˛u14/7/95
Walking at the cemetery of YH. It is Friday noon, after the call to prayer, some women came to the cemetery to pray for their dead relatives and put water into the aluminum or ceramic dishes or “güvec” which are laid over the earth pile, near the head of the dead. The cemetery is on a slight hill, located over the ancient settlement, as the rest of the village is. It is dated, according to Sefer Dede, to the founding of the village, ca. 1908, predating the War of Sakarya. But there are no dates earlier than 1966. It is a beautiful hill, with wild flowers  and barley stalks. It is very centrally located:  the Midas tumulus is to the east, 
to the west is the Dig House, Kızlarkayası is to the north, with a view of the minaret and to the south, is the City Mound. 
The burials started from the northern end and continued to the southern part of the cemetery. After the area was filled, then they would move to the eastern portion.
It is difficult to decide on a chronological sequence, based on types of burials.
Moreover, some of the later graves are in the style of the earlier ones, both in style and in materials. Manner of Disposal: The trench is dug, depth varies with the sex of the deceased. Woman’s grave is dug to ca. 1,20 m. man’s, ca. 1,00m. (woman’s is up to her breasts, man’s up to his waisline....supposedly to cover their sexual organs). The body is wrapped in a white shroud which everyone buys during their lifetime so that it is ready when needed. Eyes are covered with cotton, hands and feet are painted with henna. Once the shrouded body is lowered with the coffin, the latter is removed and the body wrapped in the shroud is turned slightly to its side, facing southeast (kıble), feet toward east. Then, a mudbrick wall is built, abutting the deceased, (about 2-3 rows high) forming a narrow chamber. The rest of the trench is filled with earth which was dug out earlier, to form a slight mound. The earlier burials have no built grave; the oval shaped mound is surrounded by mudbricks or stones and at each end are wooden markers. The latter are cut out in the shape of a head. The later burials have a built grave, rectangular in shape, resting on a raised platform. It is made of either poured cement or marble.
An old woman and her da-in-law and granddaughter were praying by an early type grave which turned out to be last year’s. At the head was placed a mortar, at the foot,  (The coffin is removed, because the concept of ‘earth to earth’ Another type has only an upright stone at the head. Others have no markers at all. (May be they disintegrated). white “dibek”, an irregularly shaped stone with a hole drilled into its middle. The wife said the old man wished these to be placed by his grave, as he had carved them himself, the stone with hole in middle was used to flatten out dung cakes. So, one stone was to process food (Bulghur), the other to provide warmth (dung-cake)...Two basic subsistence items for the living! Archaeologically, this grave would be considered contemporaneous with a 50-year old grave! But, it is only 2 years old.
	The members of an extended family are buried close together. But there is no multiple burials. 
In the middle of the bowl is a stone which stabilizes the pot and prevents birds from falling into it when they perch to drink from it. toccurs very quickly). , about .50-1.0 m. from each other.Archaeologically, there is no typological or material artifacts which would indicate the range of dates, except for the dates on the latest graves. As for the socio-economic indicators, there is none. I think that must be due to the Islamic concept that we are all equal in the eyes of the creator....in death... even though, in life there is definitely socio-economic differentiation, marked by types of houses, amount of land, farm equipment etc... 
The epitaph of Cem Ertürk, a 27-year old soldier:
“Dertler söylenmesin icimde kalsın , yük olmasın artık vücuduma can
Mevkiler, söhretler--- dileyen alsın, bana bir mezarlık toprak ver, Vatan.”
Epitaphs are very rare, in fact I have only seen one. 
On the holy day of Friday, women come to pray by their relatives’ graves;
belief is that the dead are seeing them on that day.
