4/9/95  According to Z. Köseoglu whose family owns 16 milking Holstein cows, each yields ca. 20 kg. of milk per day; in one year of 300 milking days, it yields about 5 tons of milk. Up to 1 1/2 months before birth, the cow is milked..Gestation period is the same as for women: 9 months...This is very profitable, including the cost of feed (find that out)...       					-----------------Further investigation of the nearby farming villages located in the uplands where grazing of sheep and goats continue for 10 months of the year, show more specialized herding practices, such as developing more intensive grazing strategies at different elevations and utilizing seasonal grasses in micro-niches outside of the farmed land (At ÇK and SÖ)It should be noted, though, that  finding labor, especially that of skilled shepherds, remains  a critical factor. In most cases labor of a family member is the most economical and reliable option.ÇEKIRDEKSIZ Village: - HerdingHerding:  Grazing land: 17,000 (Kızıllı - 10 km. distance; near village - 3,000 d. 1,000 sheep+ 250 cows. Sheep are taken to Kızıllı plateau by shepherds who bring them in AM and PM for milking, then, they take them back for grazing for a total period of 6 months, staying at sheepfolds with the sheep...milking is done by women outside of their home territory, in common village grounds, so that they don’t pollute the residential areas...Difference from YH is that people and animals are completely separated. IS THIS AN ETHNIC CUSTOM? If we don’t find a lot of garbage pits and dung heaps in archaeological context, does that mean that this is  different ethnically?Sheep pens and cow sheds are outside the courtyard, in some distance, in a separate enclosure. People and animals are not mixed.In 1965 there were 10,000 sheep, 5,000 Angora goats. Since 1980, herds began to get smaller, because of lack of shepherds, and young people got education and left the village.At ÇK I was the guest of Sevim’s (Remzi’s wife) niece. She is married to Mustafa Ayaz who is reputedly very rich, owns about 1,000 d. of land, plus 200-300 heads of sheep...