8/7/95 (See NURTEN AYTEKIN in Herding Section)One of the many activities women are engaged in starting early July is processing the sheared wool. It is put in mattresses and “yorgan”(comforter); mothers and grandmothers have to give several or at least one to each of their kids, as part of their trousseau. The process involves washing the wool and  after drying it the woman cleans off the sticks and stones in it, while at the same time she does 2 other operations: fluffing it and separating the higher quality from the lesser one. The former goes into comforter and mattress, the latter into pillows. “Yün altın gibidir; tekrar tekrar kullan, eskisi gibi güzeldir”....The wool for bedding is from Karaman sheep; merinos is almost always goes  to factory for fabric manufacture.These women are not engaged in spinning the wool in this village, to make sweaters and other hand-knit items, even though they know how to do it. They now use synthetic wools bought from town to make house slippers with four or six needles. A few knit sweaters from bought wool.BREAD -Tandır evinde, tandır üzerinde gözleme ve bazlama yapılıyor. (For instructions, refer to Ayse Köseoglu tape).Bazlama resembles PIDE, except former is smaller, thicker and fluffier. It is made on a round ceramic tray, called “Toprak Sac”, obtained from Mihallıcık. Gözleme, on the other hand, is made on a convex metal tray, it is thinner, like Yufka. (to continue)HANDICRAFTS - Women are engaged in making “igne oyası” for yazma edging, knitting socks and sweaters, lace table covers and comforters (yorgan). Girls , from age 8-9 on, are usually taught by their sisters, mothers, aunts to do these things in preparation for their trousseau. “Kız besikte, çeyiz sandıkta.. An interesting subject is how different motifs and designs operate within a village and how they change...Even though most women try to preserve their cache of motifs within their family, somehow other groups get hold of them clandestinely. Nurgül told me that she used to go visit a friend’s mother who would not give her secrets away. Each time she visited she would examine her lace patterns...eventually, she reproduced some of them. Another story is that Bahar, Kezban’s daughter,  is teaching the young daughters of the migrant workers from Urfa and Adana to do lacework as well as the “oya” motifs and their colors, as practised in this village. In return, they show Bahar their “oya” patterns which are bolder and have brighter colors. Thus, exchange of aspects of material culture between Central and SE Anatolia. EMINE DOGAN- (widow of Niyazi’s deceased son, Rıza). She makes a living for herself and her sons completely on her own resources.She is 45 yrs. old, has been a widow for 11 yrs. never wanted to remarry. She is from Beypazarı. She married at 16, he was the same age. She never attended school. She brought up her 3 kids, 2 are married, one wants to go to university. She lives across the path from her in-laws, in a separate house & garden.. The second house they were building with her husband was finished by her, after his death. So, now her newly married son and da-in-law live in that house, in the same courtyard. Emine’s in-laws have three houses in the courtyard, one for each married son (one is Zihni and Nurgül), one for themselves...She makes a living by sheep...she has 100..she makes butter, yoghurt, cheese, wool...All done in 3 months...Of the total, ca. 80 give lambs/year.. Depending on my needs, I either sell 3/4ths or sell less. I also have 7 goats.Her in-law receives a salary from her for herding her sheep....40,000TL /sheep per month, for 6 months...She sells the products in Polatlı.. She keeps about 200 kg. of milk produce/yr., about 500-600 kg. is sold. I do the shearing myself too. I am also related to Müzeyyen Simsek by marriage. Niyazi, my in-law, is her uncle. I did not want to marry, I am not from this village so I could not really get too close to any other men. She learnt to read herself. She has been in YH for 16 yrs. We could not make a living at BP, so we came to YH where his parents lived. You and all your relatives who live close to you, do you ask for help? Yes, of course. But still we are all idividual households.I rent 50 dek. land, I plant wheat, barley and melons.. 20 dek. barley, 10 dek. wheat, 5 dek. melons. Is it for home consumption? Only for home.Some years we cannot plant for ourselves, I rent it to relatives, like sharecropping. We decide on a certain fee / dek. and they pay me that..irrespective of their own earnings from that land. I also pay for the rent.(This year I paid 3million TL rental for 50 dek. land). This year I will buy barley, feed and hay...Last year we bought 100 million TL of yem. This year it will be more..6 araba of Hay is 7 million TL. I got 140 yarim barley. Lambs eat only feed, whereas sheep eat a combination of three. Lambs are costly..Sheep are very, very hard when you don’t have good labor force.	What did you buy for your son, at marriage? Yes, Home furniture, yorgan, yatak, TV, gold bracelets for bride, chains...the bride brings clothing, bedroom furniture. I bought her wedding gown. Each family gives each other gifts, also...salvarlık, gömlek, yemeni, rug etc....My in-law is also a widow...My son met her at school...he wanted her, so I had to agree...Simdi onu everecek durumumuz yoktu, ama istedi. Cok koyun, kuzu sattık...300 million TL was spent...I paid off everything already. My younger son stays in Polatlı with his sister’s family...So, that also helps me a lot. All FAMILY members help each other. (She loves her son-in-law like her son, he is a driver and well-to-do). Her daughter is not allowed to work, by her husband. She only graduated from primary school. 					