26/9/95 about Herding:  (Mustafa Yıldırım - 82 yrs. old)- at Çekirdeksiz VillageFrom 1945 to 1965, herding was very prosperous-- ca. 15,000 sheep and goats.10 months, from March to January the herds spend time outdoors: non-milking (“Yoz”) stays with one shepherd in Kızıllı plateau, milking goes with another shepherd daily between grazing near village grazing lands and home for the milking. Now, beginning May 15 to Aug. 15, one shepherd who takes the milking sheep for the day, brings them back in the evening for milking; they stay in the owners’ sheds near their house at night; milked in am, then taken for the whole day again. After milking is finished in Aug. 15, both groups join the “Yoz” herd till January...after that they all come back to their sheep pen in the village (outside the home CY, in a separate place), and periodically go out, while being fed at home. Birthing is in January, continues till May. If there are good rams, they get pregnant...now we keep the rams together with sheep all the time.What % is kept, and what is sold or butchered? Depends on your feeding ability, and space to keep them and how much money you need from selling the lambs.. You have to arrange the numbers according to your needs.					------------------For ex. 100 sheep eat 6.5 tons of barley in one winter. If you can’t give that you can’t keep them...plus hay (10 cartfuls) plus lambs feed (for 50 lambs, 1,500 kg. of feed). Very expensive..  At YH they can’t do 10 months of grazing-- because they don’t have hills for grazing..it is hard for them to walk thru muddy fields...They feed them at home most of the time.  					--------------------Up until 1950’s, the Angora goat was very profitable on local and overseas markets, and it was primarily bred for its wool. At present,  goat to sheep ratio is 1:100 in the region of Polatlı.  Reason given is that the two varieties of sheep are more ecoomical and easier to care for. Merinos wool, in addition, has a higher market value than that of Angora goat. (U.K., and U.S. have become major centers of Angora wool, since 1950’s).	History of Settlement and Land Use  -  Yassıhöyük village is located at the edge of the  former floodplain  of the Sakarya river, in west central Turkey. Extending over the ancient settlement and surrounded by burial mounds or "tumuli", the village  includes good arable  land and covers an area of nearly 2,500 hectares (ha.) (village area is about 2.5 ha.). YH is one of The ethnic composition of the original village is Turkoman farmers, a group of seven families who settled in Kısla district in 1890's , three km. north of the present village. The village moved to its present locality in early 1920's, due to the flooding of the river which killed crops and caused malaria. Initially, the optimum grazing land near the village was shared with sheep and goatherders coming from the mountainous Bolu region (about 120 km. to the north). The interaction between the village farmers and sheepherders resulted in an exchange of hired labor for grazing land . The village population gradually grew to include 60 HH, more people arriving from Bolu, Sivrihisar (Eskisehir) and Beypazari (Ankara ), in addition to groups of ethnic Turks from Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Romania, as part of the settlement policy of the newly forming Turkish State between the 1930 and 1950's. At present, Yassihöyük is the smallest village, with 412 people, among the four villages which are near to it. 	In 1933 fifty hectares of farmed land was owned by 17 HH. Clearing land and canal irrigation continued at a rapid rate until 1953 when 1,000 ha. of land was under cultivation with wheat, barley, lentils, chick peas, rice and flax. With land reforms of 1952 and 1994 an attempt was made to equalize land ownership among the villagers . However, each HH got several small land plots, of a varied size and soil quality, and randomly distributed in different areas. The number of HH continued to increase until it reached 100 HH by mid-1980's, (presently, 80 HH), with the concomitant expansion of the cultivated land which reached 1,600 ha. while  field size/HH shrank.  Fifty years ago herding was practised on a much larger scale because it was very arduous to till the soil with the available plough. So, it was easier to engage in herding even though it was not very profitable. Grazing land was larger and larger herds were kept-- 500 sheep would yield 300 lambs, 150-200 would be sold, adding 100 sheep to the herd and providing feed and other needs for the family (pers. comm. Oct.’95, Hüdai bey). What about improving grazing areas? Would that increase herding?“If natural grasses are allowed to regenerate, we might be able to maintain and perhaps increase herds, even though we cannot reach the numbers that we had 50 years ago.”(Hüdai). But it is not only the decrease of grazing land but also unplanned clearance for farmland which hinders herds, ie. they cannot move in a straight route during grazing. About animal fertilizer and “tezek”,  by-products which are important aspects of symbiosis between farmer and herder...From standpoint of feeding herds, going into “anız” is, in turn, very nourishing. Also, herds “harrow” the land with their nails during  grazing. “Nadas” fields have a lot of good grass which also provides nutrition for the herds, especially in spring. What strategies were used during pre-tractor times for the two to “feed” each other? Little farming, a lot of herding. Diet was based largely on animal products (it is the opposite now).2 For ex. 100 sheep eat 6.5 tons of barley in one winter. If you can’t give that you can’t keep them...plus hay (10 cartfuls) plus lambs feed (for 50 lambs, 1,500 kg. of feed). Very expensive.. 3 About 25 years ago at YH, major subsistence was based on herding..now, 1,800-2,000. Because since 1958 modern farming equipment  and water from Sakarya was accessible, farming became important. So, herding became secondary. A new cycle of breeding sheep and goats is starting, because it is very profitable--meat and milk especially (pers. comm: Hüdai, Nov. 1995).4 The main grazing area, Kızıllı Plateau, used to belong to the village of YH. This land  has been gradually absorbed by ÇK village,  since 1950’s.From the point of view of Farming...(Atilla bey from Ilçe Tarım, Polatlı)..Dry farming techniques during pre-tractor times: given that technology was primitive (kara saban), area ploughed/day was 3-4 dekar. Tractor and pulluk increases it to 50-60 dekars. Fertilizer. Higher yielding crops...better preparation of soil....Fallowing System: In regions which are lower in rainfall than 470 mm. (Polatlı is 270 mm. 50-year mean rainfall), one-year NADAS, one-year crop alternation was practised in the past. Nadas allows 2-year water absorption for one crop, (as we get 1/2 amount of rain/year, necessary  for crops. ) Crops were local: wheat (Polatlı kösesi, sülhak, topbas--all used for bread-- these were local). Kunduru was used for macaroni--hard wheat.. Present strategy is to diversify crops, legumes (chickpea, lentil, bean, cumin -- growth period is 5 months--  and irrigated cash crops ..these took the place of NADAS, but it is not good for the soil, even cumin draws   water..but it is an economical necessity for the farmer, short-term gain.Therefore, short-term gain sacrifices long-term gain...What the farmer should do is to divide up his land between (a) crops and (b) nadas.. bostan, cumin, nadas...after it is harvested, one will see that nadas field will give better cereals yield than field with bostan and cumin....Oats and rye were also grown for animals.. after ‘60s farm animals became rare, so these crops stopped. Herds, then, were in major part, grazed...Productivity:  In the past, local wheat prod. was 1: 3 teneke; now bezostaya(Russian wheat) yields 1:10-15 but the latter has less protein. Bakliyat (legumes), cumin, even cereals were planted for family subsistence, 40 years ago...with dry farming, in April..does not coincide with cereals, (growth period is 150 days.) A land of 15-20 dekar was sufficient for a family AND FOR exchange with other crops within or between villages...WHEN POP. RISES, WHAT ARE THE STRATEGIES TO INCREASE YIELD?(1) NADAS, (2) EXPAND WATER RESOURCES, (3) EXPAND FARMLAND, by taking over grazing land, (4) CASH CROPS Polatlı was a village until 1926...attached to Haymana and Sivrihisar..Pop. increased due to birth and immigrants from outside..Polatlı ECONOMY IS ALSO BASED 80% ON agriculture and animal husbandry..Productivity increased by 5-10 times due to: (a) technology, (b) selecting for more productive crops, (c) fertilizer, (d) preparing the soil better...(e) producing summer crops for cashIn the past,  crops was for subsistence, not for profit. Someone with 50 dekar was called “agha”. Dry farming around Polatlı:  is 2, 700,000 dönümlük alan; of this, 1,250,000 d. is for wheat (%65 of total); 550,000d. for barley (%30) ; 12,000d.  for rye; 45,000d. oats.. 25,000d. lentils...(So, of the total, 2/3 is dry-farming).How does a farmer reduce risk?  In the past, the farmer used to take precaution against bad conditions, evil-eye, destructive worms  etc..by magic and other actions supported by beliefs..iyi toprak serpmek, “urgan” atmak etc...Since 1960’s we are trying to fight against worms by herbicides...How about crop alternation for guarantee against bad surprises?Yes, they had chickens, sheep, and in addition planted different crops, vegetables, “combine” ziraatçilik vardı... Same farmer  did agriculture and animal husbandry...One made up for the other...Simdi bu denge bozuldu.One reason for agricultural indifference is the way in which land is apportioned after the father dies...each inheritor gets a small portion...not enough for a living...also, each person tries to outfit himself with his individual technology...					