4.7.99		ÖMERLERTranscription: We are near a©ıl ÖM-5..sheep and goats are resting under the shadow of a rock shelter, while the shepherd and the owner, Mehmet Akyar are resting..This is Aˆa©ı Öz Mvk.Across from us is very stony, limestone cliffs..they call it “KIRMALAR”.There is an Akyar Mvk. in the south near Porsuk..that is the name of a “mera” he told us..They own fields there too. Akyar is the southern boundary of Ömerler.He is 73 yrs. old. Where did you do Agriculture, HERDING in the past? Which areas?AGRICULTURE: Aˆa©ı Öz, Yukarı Öz, Akyar’dan Sazılar hududuna kadar, Kaˆ, Mandır..At present same places are being farmed...GRAZING: Yazkam (now agricultural); Ba©lıca kırması; Ak Kırma; Kara Kaya (köyün baˆında...saban girmeyen yerlerde...There used to be much more grass on the Kırmalar than now..Where the tractor cannot go in, we use it as grazing land now..Before 60 yrs, grazing land was more than half of farmland..There is yavsan, kekik there, on grazing land..What about the demolished agıl across from ÖM-5? The owner died. An agha used it till recently, 8-10 yrs ago.. Nothing except stone foundations are left..they took the wood and some other materials. That area is where the old village used to be.There are still house remains, graveyard there..People moved higher, to the present location..due to good, drinking water there.In the old village, drinking water was bitter.Until 1946, Gençali and Ömerler were under one Muhtar..one polity.. Then, they became separated..under Ömerler Muhtar..we went to the same school.Until 1946, Ömerler, Y. Köseler, Tekke, Gencali, Sazılar were under the district of Sivrihisar (province of Eskiˆehir). Then, we became part of Polatlı.We were 6 in the HH. How much land did you have? My father was also four brothers.Each brother had several children...We separated our land about 30 yrs. ago.4 brothers had 70-80 d. altogether.. We planted sugar beet near Porsuk, since 1945.In 1950’s land reform...State took farm suitable land into Treasury and distributed it to farmers. Animals were our main mainstay..We always had shepherds..mainly from Bolu. My uncle did herding also. 4 brothers had 500 sheep and goats..Now I have c. 200 animals.Irrigated Land: 1000 d. near Porsuk irrigated with motors and canals; Unirrigated: much more..Y. Köseler, Sazılar, Tekke have much more irrigated land..one side is Sakarya, other side is Porsuk. Tekke is a small village, c. 15-20 HH.Diet: did you eat more meat before? Those who have animals used to eat a lot.Was there drought here before? Yes, many times..In ‘30s, ‘40s. At that time we sold our animals as a hedge..We planted wheat, barley, cumin..we sold cumin..it is harvested by hand; it is an arduous process. It is grown in dry..there is no hashish here. In Gencali they did Hashish..also in Saray. It is small quantity.Only used animal fat--butter.We had rice (çeltik) near Porsuk- why don’t you do rice now? State has to give you permission for that. Because it causes marshland, mosquitoes. We plant oats for cow feed.Dog eats “top”, barley mixed with water..it cannot be too hard or too soft.He also eats remains of “mundar” sheep and goats..because we don’t eat that.Now, the herd is going to Aˆa©ı Öz mvk. Ba©lıca Deresi.. 500 m. from here for water. 