
LAND DIVISION ñ 1952, 1999. (by Erdogan Tokat) (also see, Feridun and Y¸ksel Yavuz, Ratip Esen, Mustafa «oban)
LAND DIVISION – 1952, 1999. (by Erdogan Tokat)
The 3 Aga’s started on small farming plots here, mainly near Sakarya.
Our land had a deed. My grandfather paid land tax (200 TL). It was very high- He gave an application to have part of his land taken back, because tax was high. (One cow sold for 3 TL). He had 5-10 shepherds, as many workers,,,he had to support them too.
Conditions given to people for Land Acquisition: 
1.    6 months of residency in the place where land is
each HH got 180 d.
20 years of payment – then get the deed

4.The 1999 distr. Stipulated payment for 10 years.
In 1999: When central Irrigation system was set up, 4,000-5,000 d. land distributed to the landless, in varying amounts depending on the quality of the soil and location: more fertile, less dönüms. (4 qualities) – In the past, the distributed land had been farmed by only two families: Tokat and Yavuz. Part of their Land was taken, it was not under our names, nor could they prove that we had been farming it for 20 years (zilliyet hakkı). So, it flew away…….
The land that was contested was not distributed until it was proven to belong to the Treasury.
In the past a farmer could have rented land from the Treasury also. But not any more.

The tractor changed the whole face of the Village and the nature of crops -
The first tractors did 20 d/day; they used it for going to Polatlı. The villagers paid the owners (25 KURUS) to get a ride.
Erdogan’s father had 1,000 d. at the time he acquired the tractor.
He told a story about Güssüm’s father, Ahmet Pekmezci who was a fisherman..he knew a lot of the village history, very eloquent. He met Demirel when he was an engineer supervising the canalizing of Sakarya.
Ahmet caught some fish, and they had lunch together. Ahmet was from Beypazarı.
People who came from Yazıca (Çoban, Ratıp Esen) had attended school before they came to YH. They were also hard workers here. After land distr. They got 190 d. land and hard work led to their becoming rich.
Some of these people came as “ortakcı” (Dogan and Köseoglu who are relatives) 
Real modern agriculture started about 20 years ago…with timely tilling, putting fertilizer etc..(in the ‘80s; that corresponds to the expansion of fields and proportionate decrease of herding, especially in low floodplains).
“Allaha emanet, ben sürdüm, allah verirse verir”…

Division of Land of Tokat Family – 
Hacı Mehmet had 8 sons and a wife..at death his estate was divided. Total was 1,500 d.near Sakarya. All irrigated.(Hacı Mehmet is Grandfather Atik’s son)- One of the sons is Erdoğan’s father, Fazlı. So Fazlı (Erdoğan’s father) had 7 brothers..

Erdoğan’s Great-grandfather is Atik – 
son is Hacı Mehmet (Erdoğan’ın grandfather)
Fazlı, has 8 sons: Erdoğan and Atik and………..
Fazlı got 120 d. land just as all the other villagers got.
We were very rich when my father (Fazlı) was alive; we had 3 tractors.
(In ‘60s there were people who still farmed with bulls and horses)

Now (1999) there are 60 tractors in the village; some families have more than 1; Ünal Yavuz has 4 tractors.

Erdoğan Tokat’ın ailesinde bir tek tapu vardı O da Hacı Mehmet’in üstüneydi. (dedesi). O Ölünce bütün arsalar toplu bir halde satıldı. Zira 48 kisi mirascıydı

1982 de bütün tarlalar satılmıstı.
. 






Hüseyin Köseoğlu -  Land division

Hüseyin is now the new Muhtar. He is the cousin of Zekai, the previous one. We are talking at his restaurant near Sakarya. 
In 1999 the Treasury Land was distributed. Land given to head of HH and Also bring together all lands belonging to one HH, so that there would not be wasted time, energy and piping for one person going from place to place. All Treasury Land has been distributed now. 
Grazing Land belongs to the whole village: c. 8000 d. 
The people have to pay for the land for 10 years…they cannot rent it or sell it, unless the head of the HH dies.  People who were young enough to work were given land, the elderly or people with SS did not get land.
Now there is no LAND TO BE sold anymore.
Land at YH was expensive…because our land is irrigated. For 30 d. people had to pay 12 billion TL. 


