

9.7.99
Jason has been drawing the Land Use Maps: one is for Present Day; second is for
pre-1950’s based on 1:25,000 topo map and Village Kadastral maps of YH, ÖM (only to include the new village environs), GA and YK.
The date on both maps are 1957, 1954, respectively. This is an extensive survey, not an intensive one. The aim is to compare change in Land Use patterns from before tractor use to the Present. Next step is to isolate variables to explain the change in Land Use, based on interviews with informants, (climate, politics, land reform,  change in traditional technology and practices, etc) and geological/geomorphological findings and personal observations of the physical landscape.

 Land Use: Survey Area covered: a trapezoidal area enclosing the territory of 4 villages:
ÖM, YK, YH and GA -  18 km(N-S); 18 (E-W), encompassing an area of 
c. 280 sq. km= 28,000ha. 



Method of Survey:


1. first-hand observation of land use patterns in present ;
2. reading village maps (pafta--drawn in 1954) from before tractor which had big impact on land use;(maps were presumably drawn from first-hand observation by surveyors);
3. using 1:25000 cultural/topo maps(1957) to place (a) fold locations, (b) to identify topographical features, (c) to locate routes of access;
4. interviews with local elderly farmers and shepherds and village folks;

How did we proceed: Sequence of Events:
	a. using topo maps (drawn in 1957), to find folds or areas where folds once 	were;
	b. recording landuse patterns; derived from going to high points in areas, which 	provided a long-distance view of the area...including YarımcanıN sivrisi, 	Çevrimkaya tepesi, Erenler Tepesi, Dede T. Kızıldikmen and others..
	c. boundaries of patterns of use are derived from observing specific features 	which can be matched from the map to on- site observation (be they cultural or 	natural features)
	d. observing borders between different types of landuse by means of identifying 	natural and cultural features found on the map;
	e. The past is derived from the Paftas, (drawn in 1954-)-after having 	reassembling them and re-calculating different scales into a uniform one, 	matching primarily via cultural features, ie. roads..how the fields fit into the 	cultural/..topographic map

(We are assuming that the significant cultural features of both sets of maps have not significantly changed despite 3 yrs of separation in creating them...and that they represent Pre-tractor Land Use)..
	f. learned how to deal with sheep dogs and gnats...
	g. drawing plans of sheepfolds with use of a total station; recording 	natural/landscape features  and tools left in and around folds and shepherd 	huts..

Rough estimates of  farming: grazing upper Sakarya-Porsuk Drainage (incl. YH- )

Pre-tractor Land Use (not including Sazılar and Çağlayık)- 250 sq. km
We did not have village maps for Sazılar and Çağlayık)
farmland: 28% = 7,000 ha.
grazing:   66%  = 16,500 ha.
unsuitable 6%: =  1,500 ha.


Total Present Land Use (including Sazılar and Ça©layık Mvk.) - area is 280 sq. km.	 farmland: 63%= 17,640ha. 				
grazing: 31%=    8,680ha.			 
unsuitable: 5%= 1,400 ha.		 	 
			 	`		 
Total Present Landuse (not incl. Sazılar and Ça©.)- area 250sq.km
farmland: 64%= 16,000 ha.
grazing: 30% = 750 ha.
unsuitable: 6%=150 ha.
(This inclusion shows that the pattern of ratios do not change much, despite the addition or the removal of 10% of land area)--appears that area removed is representative of the entire survey area II)
	
	Present Landuse for YH		Past Landuse for YH
	farmland: 75%=1,950 ha.		farmland: 17%  = 442
	grazing:    25%= 650 ha.		grazing: 83%= 2,152 ha.
	unsuitable 0.25%= 6 ha.		unsuitable: 0.25%=6 ha.

  
Location of Folds: 
Area I (1998 survey), east of YH from AV to ÜÇ ;
Area II (1999 survey), west of upper Sakarya drainage, from Porsuk to where Ankara Çay and Sakarya meet.

•	Not far from traditional source of water;
•	generally face south
•	at lower elevations than those east of Sakarya: at ÇK and ˜Ö; at 700-750-780-940(Mandır)
•	closer proximity to farmland than Area I (1998) survey showed: ÖM-2 (400 m);
	ÖM-4 -Mandır (2.5 km); ÖM-1 (9 km); GA-1 (6.5 km.)
•	Some of the folds occur completely abutting farmland, there is absolutely no local grazing around the fold (ÖM-5), (ÖM-2). Grazing in last year’s survey (Area I) was different; having grazing near folds, c. 200 m. from it..
•	In contrast, In Belkavak there is grazing all around-
•	In what way did the pattern of farmland expansion occur, and what effect did this expansion have on fold locations?

 In area I, at present, the pattern of expansion: there is more uniform farm expansion because the terrain is less broken with plains, expansion leading into gentle slopes/rolling hills (Nohutluk, Aˆıro©lu Mvk)--the a©ıls which are encroached upon by farmland cease to function ( KD-1, KD-3, Orta A©ıl, Hacı ˜aban), and those higher up in the hills c(KR-1) continue to function or new ones can be built..There are deres and pınars easily available in the hills..no water problem.. so the result is more of an even separation between areas used for grazing and those used for farming..	 
( this pattern of farmland expansion is likely to affect fold dissolution, because herds will have a hard time to cross over ridges to get to grazing land - a geographic reason --- 

In Area II, at present, pattern of expansion of farmland is much more uneven;
because of the broken nature of the terrain in contrast to Area I. So, areas of farming are non-contiguous.Farming areas are expanding into flat plots between ridges, slopes of tumuli, near höyüks or deep gorges..(e.g. Yukarı Öz, Kabatepe), encroaching the streams of the area..
Lower quality of soil, less availability of functional  springs and “dere”..

Fold locations tend to remain where they were, if they continue to function; as farmland encroaches, it is weaving its way into the landscape all over..especially, if there is a viable source of water, folds remain nearby..this is one reason for presence of folds..
But many of them have shut down due to reasons other than farm expansion..lack of easily accesible water source, cost of feed, cost of shepherds’ labor etc...(other factors these need to be explained). 
At present there are 11 functioning folds in the whole survey area (none at YH)..
Most drastic change has been in the YK territory; huge expansion of farmland near Kabatepe  and Acıpınar(750-850 m.) and in Ömerler territory (Kepezarkası, A.Öz mvk)
(800-950m; 750-850 m.)

A unique, transitional area, At Belkavak mvk. NW of Y. Köseler,c. 10 km distance,
there is lush vegetation , watered by Belkavak dere..now it is used for grazing..it could be dry farmed..it is flat..but it is still left for grazing...Reasons might be: it would be hard to irrigate it (over large slopes), long distance from village..although small plots are already encroaching...(show slides..with sheep/goat paths over slopes)

Why is grazing land in western Sakarya drainage area lower in elevation than
in the eastern Drainage area? It appears that the great expanses of flat land which occur on relatively high  slopes in the west have been opened to farming., leaving the areas around the bases of these plateaus and in the valleys for grazing (700-875m)---and those are on lower elevations. Whereas, in the east (Area II), the flat lands occur on lower elevations, leaving grazingland to occur at higher elevations..(850-1200m and up)
Here, the important factor is not the elevation at which grazing/farmland are located; the more significant is the accesibility relative to productivity (irrigation, moving the tractor up 70 degree slope, cost of diesel etc..)  

	


Pre-1950’s Landuse:
Pattern of Herding – 

Generalization: IN LARGE EXPANSES OF GRAZINGLAND WHERE FOLDS OCCUR, ONE HAS TO CONSIDER THREE VARIABLES:
1. presence of water; 2. availability of grazingland in nearby areas (1-5 km distance from fold); 3. protection from natural forces (snow, wolf, floods). If we consider these variables, 
	a. Kabatepe Mvk being extremely well watered and having large expanses of very good grazingland, and easily accessible,  quality protection should be expected, it is the most fold-populated area..
	b. Öz mvk. and areas nearby, having slightly  less of all 3 variables, show less number of folds, but still better populated than north of Korubük...The latter has ample water and very good protection but very poor grazing..thus, less folds.. The third area, in the shape of an arc extending from Keçi K. and Karasivri, is unpopulated by folds..despite good grazingland, but no protection and no water...
Hence, interplay of factors....

Pattern of farming, 
Beginnings of farmland encroachment into grazingland is seen in Yukarı Öz mvk..
which was probably one of the few extensively dry farmed areas in the past..
Small scale irrigation would have been possible here from springs which were functioning then..At the opposite end, also, encroachment is seen west of Sakarya..


•	most areas, up to 1 km. distance from Sakarya and Porsuk..
Interesting pattern around the bends of Sakarya, in the NE area of survey(Kocaköse) have been left as grazing land from pre-50s to present, even though that could have been readily irrigable and used for farming.. This area used to be a large swamp where they hunted boars)..
•	along Kocaöz  deresi and up in Yukarı Öz mvk.. springs are Kocaöz..it is the largest expanse of flatland close to Ömerler..(less than 1 km to 3,4 km away)
•	At Köseler-Kayran mvk. farming has remained pretty much the same as pre-50’s..
Because, it is a well-defined flat area, within irrigable distance, near the village..
•	Single biggest chunk of land farmed in the past.....along with I©deli Yayla mvk.
•	Farmland occurs at 650-750 m. however Karaöz is significantly higher, 850-950m.	
•	Much Less dry farmed land--irrigation farming would have been in areas up to 1.5 km at the most..
 
Pattern of Grazing, 
•	In the entire area there are 52 folds( 11 at present)..Large percentage of 52 would have been functioning.
•	Located mostly around Kabatepe and southern Belkavak mvk.--relatively high, flat areas , well-watered with springs..presently large numbers of springs are dry..
•	Folds are located from 1 km (Belkavak, Kabatepe--) to 10 km (farthest from Belkavak to YK -1)
•	In other regions, edge of Öz mvk., near ömerler village 200 m..- 2 km of village
	(8 of the 12 folds are within 2 km distance)..YK village folds are more spread out.
•	there is a higher occurrence  of folds in Belkavak and Kabatepe than rest of the region..very well-watered..sufficient protection and very large expanses of grazingland in the immediate area..
•	One area devoid of folds: high, flat plateaus extending in an ark from Keçikale T. to Karasivri T. (850-950). Because there is no water, no protection from wind, wolves, rain etc..although it is good grazingland.
•	Area 1-2 km north of Porsuk, although there is sufficient water, very protective area with natural cliffs...but grazing not so good..poor soil to support good grazing.
	About 6 folds..

Future Research - 
(1) using Village Land maps for Area I, to delineate patterns of farming and grazing for pre-50 period, in east of upper Sakarya drainage;
(2) to survey folds in Area I which are not in use, or destroyed, to derive an estimated total of  fold numbers in the pre-50 period;
(3) to expand area of landuse survey to include, to the north and east, areas east of Avˆar village to the slopes of Çile Da©; to the south, well-watered upland plains, with active springs, where villages of HacıTu©rul, Çimence©iz and Beyce©iz are located, and Basrı village to the south. This area lies within  the drainage of Ankara Çay, and abuts the 1998 survey, thus expanding it. 
well within the parameters of the regional settlement surveys undertaken since 1987-88 and 1996-97-98.


Geology of Sakarya Drainage-(talk with Arlene Rosen- geomorphologist)

Most of the bedrock along Sakarya and Porsuk is composed of marls which are very fine carbonate clays, and they were formed in the Miocene and the Pliocene from 20-6 mill. y.a. by these large saline lakes..these existed in the region before the uplift of the Toros mountains. The lakes formed these marls, and in the marls there is gypsum
deposits, very salty and not good for agricultural soils. After the uplifting the Lakes drained and  no longer these large marl deposits were forming.

What about these springs that ran through these marl cliffs?
A- Yes, it is interesting,  you find the springs at the interface BETWEEN the marls and the basalts. I am not sure why that is...you don’t find that at the west side of Sakarya, you only find it on the East side.. and it could be because the water percolating (underground water) found an easy path underneath the basalts..it rises up through the marls, but can’t get up past the basalt, so it comes out at this interface in between. The basalt is of course much later--late Pliocene-Early Pleistocene--so it postdates these Late marls..
Q- What is the term “colluvium”?  It simply means, ‘slope wash’.. so when the forest and the natural vegetation is cut, the roots of the trees can no longer hold the soil..in the event of intense rains and wind, the soil gets soaked and it washes down the slopes..
you can recognize the colluvium because you have all this coarse grained material
mixed with the fine grained sediments, angular stones and just a mix of mush...
Alluvium is water-borne sediments in the stream system..you can recognize it, because there is a pattern of sedimentation you’ll see it laminated  sediments-- better sorting of material--orderly sedimentation of all gravel, all silt etc. and the size of the particles varies; but what is more important is that there is better sorting; so, instead of a mix of gravels, clays and silts altogether, they will be neatly organized into gravel deposits,
fine sands, fine silts etc...unless it is a flash flood deposit, then there’ll be colluvium material washed into the stream system and then just dropped..and one can distinguish between the colluvium and alluvium material.
Q- many of the folds have been abandoned, partly due to the drying of the once water-bearing streams..

A- The question is how do you know they had permanent water in them? Because a lot of these streams have only formed because of run-off in the rainy season, in the spring.
In the summer they are dry, because there is no source, there is no spring..
so it is very typical to have these “arroyos” or wadis dried all  year..in fact these drainages may be relatively new; when you have degradation of land then you get an increase in what we call “drainage density”, so you have more channels being formed.. Because when you have degradation of the vegetation, the water is no longer being soaked up by the soils, it is running off the surface so it creates new drainages that are only seasonal---the streams which are dried up are in the areas of Kabatepe, Acıpınar--
If people told you they had water in these streams year-round, then they might have been fed by springs..Q- Can springs dry up? 

A. Yes, It might be that a drop in the water table, due to droughts, earthquakes--this is an active earthquake zone. I know that Ken was telling me that during Young’s seasons there were significant quakes in the ‘60s.
There must be active faults in this area. There are active faults all over Turkey..
The geomorphologists can check if there were perennial springs in the area. 
					--------------

From “Geomorphological Background....(A. Rosen, 1996)

...”The present-day Sakarya River valley was formed within the Pleistocene by tectonic activity which lowered parts of the valley ca. 50 m. and raised blocks of the plateau to the east of the valley. The evidence for this is clearly seen at the confluences of the Sakarya and Ankara Çay (my insert: near Dümrek, northern YK territory) and again at the joining of the Porsuk with the Sakarya (my insert: near Kıranharman, southern YK territory) where blocks of the [Pliocene?] conglomerate have dropped to elevations of ca. 680-700 m. Conversely, upfaulted blocks of marl and basalt can be observed on the plateau east of the valley. To the west of the valley the conglomerate has maintained a consistent elevation of 750m but it has been cracked and eroded, exposing the underlying soft marls to extensive erosion and redeposition. The faulting(fay hattı/çatlak) and tectonic activity seems to have occured in stages separated by long periods of relative stability. The phases of stability punctuated by down-faulting are manifested in a set of cut-terraces visible along the east flank of the river valley at an elevation of ca. 720m 
(my insert: area on right of the Ömerler road from YH, where there is a line of rock formations , with some caves, and terraces above.Also, we see these formations near Nohutluk and Aˆıro©lu areas where on the terraces dry agriculture is practised) .......”





4.7.99
At Erenler Tepesi, at  980 m., 1 km. west- SW of Gençali. Saw 3 herds, each is going to a different water source, a fountain..they may be coming from the same spring.
11:30 am, after a lon g day’s walk, the midday rest for the flocks and shepherd.
2 flocks are sheep, 1 flock of goats. Probably about 450-500 animals, all belong to the village of Gençali. Jason describes landuse, but cannot hear anything due to wind).

Erenler has EBA pottery-- there is also fine-slipped red ware (Roman?); kaplumba©a bones and some other bone remnants.Illegally dug pit on top of tepe..
pictures of landscapes from top of Erenler: Cam #2, Roll 2: 30-32.

2.7.99

On Yavˆan Özü T. (Y. Köseler) - Some Observations.
Looking down at Y. Köseler village, to the south. toward Sakarya. Fields irrigated by Sakarya are adjacent to the village. They are mainly cash crops (onion, sugar beet) poplar trees along Sakarya--very scenic village. It is tucked on the edge of Yavˆan Özü
Tepe, in a dispersed, linear fashion. New route linking Ömerler.
Grazing land is above village--vast expanses of Tepes almost totally bare--except for 
oregano and yavˆan otu. These hills begin at c. 400 m. from the village. On these hills cows also graze, higher up, 750 m.
Wheat fields start after the irrigated cash crops--along Sakarya--wheat is also irrigated.
Sheep and goats and cattle are now getting into the harvested barley fields.
Farmer told us that they can irrigate as far as 5 km from village, by Sakarya (depends on how much they can afford to spend on irrigation pipes). On higher plateau cereals (wheat, barley, oats and chick peas) grown with dry farming methods.



