Gordion 2000:						June 20, 2000		
	
	This season started on June 18, at Gordion. I rented a car, again, from Levent Gökgöz in Ankara and we drove with Jason to Gordion..with all the note boxes, books and survey equipment. 
Earlier on, after coming to Ankara on the 10th, I began to collect and pack all my worldly belongings, sort them out in the process of moving out of the lojman at Bilkent. It is a discouraging process, 4 days, until 4:00 am. Finally, it was done, piled up in 3 categories, to Gordion, to U.S. and to be stored at Bilkent Do©u campus (thankfully) until I GET BACK to Bilkent hopefully in 2002. I will not be teaching next year, I’ll work at the Museum in Philadelphia and enjoy being at home. Possibly, I’ll be able to go back to teaching on one-semester basis at Bilkent.


[The objective this year is to do a comparative study of pre-60’s landuse with present day landuse (ALREADY DONE IN 1998)
in the region, east of Sakarya, to include SÖ and ÇK and HT and their environs, based on the landuse “paftas” to be acquired from Tapu Kadastro in Polatlı. That would complete east and west of Sakarya landuse studies, and the sheepfold distributions in these areas.
In addition, we are surveying near the village of Hacı Tugrul, to indicate landuse, landscape features, sheepfolds, ancient settlements.]


The ultimate aim is: to draw a picture of (ie. model) distribution of modern settlements with their agricultural and grazing land, their past landuse (pre-50s) and their relation to the surveyed ancient sites.

The geological and geomorphological info. which will be gathered from
Kealhofer’s surveys.

LANDSCAPE- EAST OF SAKARYA
Yesterday Jason and I visited the village of Hacı Tugrul (HT) which is located east of SÖ. But there is no road from SÖ or Müslim..therefore we had to go to Polatlı  first, then through Basrı up north to Çimence©iz, Yagmurbaba onto HT (c. 35 km) from YH.  As we drove up, from c. 650 m to c. 1100 m. the vegetation changed from dry steppe to verdant fruit orchards--almond, very big walnut, apricot, mulberry, grapevine-Passed a stone quarry , near Basrı (Ben Marsh said the stone is volcanic, probably basaltic, a good aggregate for cement making).




RAINFED

It is dry farming. They grow lentils, chickpeas, peas, in addition to wheat and barley and sunflower.It appears that every inch of the land is under cultivation. On the hilly uplands there are bee hives, I was told they came from Mugla. But locally there must be some too.
The general view is very rich. (Did not find out about grazing/herding yet)
				------------------
VILLAGE- HACI TUGRUL
The village is on the plateau of a hill, going further up, we took a picture of the village and the outlying farmland around it from above.
About 2 km. south of it is the ancient site of Hacı Tugrul (today, called Karahöyük- there is a hamlet by that name, of 2 HH next to it). The site was excavated by Burhan Tezcan in ‘70s (Ken said). A very major citadel, almost as large, may be larger than YH citadel mound. Has Middle Phyrgian material and later. Excavations in a very small portion..standing are large blocks of cut stone walls of “megarons”...
Still, the rails and the iron buckets for earth removal are on the site.
				------------

Tomorrow we will go to visit the muhtar of HT, Hasan Yüksel, to get
info. about agriculture and landuse. He also said that he had given the original of an aerial photo of HT to the Kaymakamlık. So, I’ll try to ask about that when I look at the Paftas.
(aerial photo does not show much).
Questions I want to answer:
1) location of folds vs. farmed and grazing land (pre-tractor):
what patterns emerge? apply these patterns to ancient settlement locations to find possible locations for folds in antiquity, and vice versa
2. Likewise, for areas under cultivation, proximity to settlement, flat land and availability of water sources important: how are these factors interrelated?

LANDUSE
Some observations of Present day  Cultivation -
Due to mechanization immense expansion of farmland...Folds have dwindled in numbers ; almost all relatively flat areas are under cultivation. Notable exception to this exists (Belkavak, western Asagı Öz, area immediately outside of Gençali and Ömerler). These areas are either hard to access (Belkavak, Asagı Öz) or protected land under government control (Treasury) like near Ömerler and Gençali, so their existence as the last areas to be encroached upon makes sense.


Cultivation patterns: : Western Bank of Sakarya-
A. generally located alongside perennial sources of water and along valleys which connect to these sources (Mandır, Kocaöz, Sakarya, Porsuk);
B. One large highland location (Yukarı Öz) farmed, probably dry farmed, chosen possibly for flatness of land, proximity to village or favorable quality of soil;
C. other areas supporting vegetation, even very small patches, are used for grazing
					--------------
HERDING

Fold Locations -
A. in areas of grazing;  B. almost always sheltered through placement on a steep hillslope and partially built into the slope; C. generally located near (less than 1 km and usually within 100 m. of) a constant source of water (Kabatepe, Kızıldikmen, Mandır); D. generally located not far from cultivated land, numerous examples abut cropland (several ÖM folds) These are the agriculturally marginal areas, in general, therefore remained as pastureland;
E. heaviest concentration in relatively flat well-watered areas (Kabatepe, Kızıldikmen, Mandır)

1. generally on plains directly in front of or on more gentle slopes of more dramatic hills/mts (YH exception)
2. easy access to water via springs or river
3. near large, flat tracts of land
4. not far from village (c. 1-5 km.)
					------------
LANDSCAPE

Near Çile Dag- Observations of Land Use 	3/7/00

Driving from Polatlı to Hacı Tugrul - Passing through the village of Beycegiz, toward Çile Dag (1440 m. high- the highest mountain in W Central Turkey). 
•	 To see the other side, toward SÖ and Avsar.
	ie. looking in the direction of YH. 
•	To observe contemporary land-use practices
On the road to Beycegiz we came upon a middle-sized herd, c. 100 sheep and goats....Yes, GOATS..much fewer than sheep. By 11:00 they were already resting, by a fountain. At Beycegiz there is a communal village fold. This is where they must be kept in the winter.
•	Up the hill, past Yagmurbaba. The barley fields are ready to be harvested. Wheat is still growing, but in a week or two that should also be ready. 
•	One of the problems with highland agriculture of cereals on upland zone is that the plant yellows very fast due to direct and intense sunlight, but the stalk does not grow high. So, the yield is lower, harvest is earlier, both of barley and wheat, than in the low plain zone.
We drove from the village of Haci Tugrul, to an ascent of 1200 m. high plateau, until the Türbe came into view down on the plain, singularly
	placed, isolated monument to Nature..about 100 m. to the SW of it is an old abandoned fold on a slight rise (HT-2, measured)...Another one which is next to the Dere is also abandoned, only sketched..
	 In this green meadow,a spectacular view, with a backdrop of several layers of Çile Dag. There is a fountain which derives its water from Türbe Deresi (Karanlık Dere), and numerous springs. So, it is lush green. The meadow surrounding it is all for grazing, although upland,  some fields are given to sunflower, wheat and barley and lentils. (Although we noted some nadas fields, in pockets, encroaching toward the foothills of Çile). All dry farmed. In the meadow are alıç, rosehip, bitter plum, scrub oak (here and there)...But the Çile Dag has become more and more filled in with oak.
In the meadow the grass is very tall, feather grass, wild barley, numerous flowers with beautiful hues of blue and violets and yellows, thorny bushes, “katır tırnagı”, oregano. Wild clover..which the sheep and cows love..Many delicate multi-colored butterflies whirling over our heads.....many many insects crawling ..
Cicadas are giving a concert..while the sparrows are flying swiftly through the bushes, calling one another.
It is most peaceful and inspiring here; the bare slopes of Çile Mts. and its meadow , the feather grass swaying in the wind, bending down and embracing the purple menekse , yellow buttercups.
						-----------
Conversation with Mustafa Küçük (83 yrs. old) and his nephews (from H. Tugrul) 3.7.00
ìI am married for 60 years. Now she [wife] is really tired. She had 13 children of whom 7 died. She also helped me with agriculture, brought bread to me in the field when I was working with 2 bulls and ìsolak ploughî..

AGRICULTURE (HT)
Where did you do agriculture, grazing in pre-50s?
•	Çile Dag mevki: Going back to 1850 agriculture was done in Çile Dag.
	Also herding.
	Agriculture: c. 2,000 d. (PAST)
	.Mevkii: Alıççukuru, Kırklar, Mantarlık, Türbe..
	Above the village is called “Dag mıntıkası”.
Today, at HT 80% of the land is owned by the Treasury and rented out. The expansion of agriculture ocurred rapidly, as farmland encroached upon grazingland, without much questioning and disputes,  since the land did not have owners, noone except  the Muhtar could question it.And he gave out favors..
Çile Dag mevkii is c. 20,000 d.

						--------------

AGRICULTURAL YIELD
Past areas of agriculture: about 2,000 d.near Çile Dag.
Aynalıkavak (now within Kocali)

Pre-50 agricultural yield: In 1 week ploughed 10 d. of land; from 30 d. got 3200 kg. So, from 1 d. got 170 kg.(Present yield: 1 d.yields 
Also, we used to grow more wheat than barley--vetch, lentils, beans were also grown. Millet (Darı ) can be grown everywhere. So, when there was drought people made bread from it. Not so great..
There was a drought in my grandfather’s time...in 1925-1930 drought--so they grew millet; you can also grow “çavdar” (rye) in drought.
The cereals did not grow..We ate “hardal otu”, “alamaslı otu”.
Hashish, sesame grown for oil.
					------------
Hunting: there was wild boar at Akgüne mevki..Ömer beyi çiftli©inde çok 
kamiˆlık vardı. 

**(Humor)  For a family of 5 how much land and how many animals do you need?
•		c. 20 d (800 kg flour ), bir teneke tatlı, bir teneke yag...at least 30 sheep, 2 cows, and a healthy woman..

LANDUSE – herding- PRESENT
[Haci Tugrul] Mer’a: Mantarlı, Çatak, Oglanölen, Alaçukur, Dutluk(?)
they are 1100 m. and over.

PAST-  areas of grazing: From Çile D. until Karahöyük Tepesi, that was the old grazing area. (1,400-1,000 M.)
In the past there was a lot of herds..Angora goat had hair going down to their nails.
How many in total: about 15,000 - 10,000.
One man had owned as many as 4 folds, (others also owned
	
	1. Görevli (?)
	2. Karapınar
	3. Karhane
	4. Karahöyük

Kıslak: a lot of shepherds came and rented our grazing land from Bolu.
From Nov 8 to May 5th. They did not take our herds. Each had at least 1,000 animals..Our grazing land   included SÖ, AV..Kıslak’s used that area too. Now they don’t come anymore.
They slept outdoors in their kepenek. Since these folds were not their permanent places, they called it TULA.. “Tula tutmak”

So, HT folds were used both by Kıslak and HT herders..they were in different territories.
Kıslak brought some “erzak” and also bought it from agriculturalists here.

When they left, they went through many villages..slept in different places. But you couldn’t say no. Because he is “yolcu”..it is in the Turkish tradition of hospitality.

As for our own herds: they also grazed year round, in different areas.
	`				-----------------

The village is on the plateau of a hill, going further up, we took a picture of the village and the outlying farmland around it from above.
About 2 km. south of it is the ancient site of Hacı Tugrul (today, called Karahöyük- there is a hamlet by that name, of 2 HH next to it). The site was excavated by Burhan Tezcan in ‘70s (Ken said). A very major citadel, almost as large, may be larger than YH citadel mound. Has Middle Phyrgian material and later. Excavations in a very small portion..standing are large blocks of cut stone walls of “megarons”..
						

“I am married for 60 years. Now she is really tired. She had 13 children of whom 7 died.She also helped me with agriculture, brought bread to me in the field when I was working with 2 bulls and “solak plough”..




LAND DIVISION

Land Dispute in 1850’s, as told by grandson of a village local:
Between Karahöyük and Railroad, N of Karah. where there is salt marsh...and reeds...There was an eˆkiya in Ayaˆ..orada da©da bir eˆkiya türemiˆ. 1850 lerde. Ona kimse müdahale edemiyor..kervanlar, yolcuları kesip biçiyor. Istanbuldan padiˆah ferman gönderiyor, onu kesin, kafasını getirene bir ödül verece©im diyor. Bizim dede yapar demiˆler, o zaman,
dede bir müfreze ile yola çıkmıˆ; sabaha karˆı “Zırve” reis denilen eˆkiyayı çeviriyorlar, kellesini de padiˆaha götürüyorlar.
O da büyük bir araziyi, Karapınardan baˆlayıp Elagöz’e kadar olan araziyi (düzlüktür), 100,000 d. bizim dedelere vermiˆler.. (Yenido©an, Poyrazköy, Temelli köyleri var orada ˆimdi)... Dede hissesini 1900 lerde satmıˆ Hacı Tu©rula....
People who are now living in Karahöyük Çiftlik inherited part of that land from their grandfathers who originally bought it from my grandfathers.They own houses in HT but use the farmland and grazing for their animals at Karahöyük..HT is about 4 km. from KaraHoyuk.
				------------

Additional Reason for preferring herding over farming in the past:
The state charged a heavy tax to agriculture in the past. In order to avoid that farmers kept their farmland to a minimum. They did not get deeds for them. It appears that one tax, that for herding was enough..plus the herding tax was less. The shepherd could hide the no. of animals in his herd….to minimize taxes… 

LANDSCAPE-EAST OF SAKARYA

ÇILE DAG IS THE PEAK WHICH FALLS BETWEEN THE “V”  of ANKARA ÇAY AND SAKARYA RIVER.

For hundreds of years the oak forest on ÇILE DAG was depleted for fuel.

Sakarya is born c. 50 km. west of Sivrihisar, at the village of Çifteler, about 10 km. SE of Hamidiye (Yagıslan).

LANDSCAPE- EAST OF SAKARYA
Mountainous area, east of SÖ, (Kabal P. Kale Tepe- 1000-1100), fed by numerous springs, Sögütlüdere, Kabal D. and various other pınars...in mountainous zone elev. from 930-1400 .....although there are flat lands, difficult to get up there with animals.....because it is high and the broken terrain makes it difficult....folds near streams near Avsar..but not many ...
folds not located very far from the villages..but the grazing territory is very wide and vast which they trample about throughout the day...

Most of the farmland in the south of and a bit north of HT...most of the territory, esp. south of Karahöyük is marshland, and in the past completely given to grazing...At present the wettest areas are still grazing and reeds, but majority of these lands have been converted to farmland (esp. around the Kara höyük Ciftlik)....

Northern slope of çile Da© is forested.....southern slopes are filled in with oak, after they stopped grazing keçi..chest-high oak.(good slides)

The variation in elevation from the south and west of HT to the north is dramatic, (900-1400 m) although not broken.....not like west of Sakarya where there are rocky broken 90 degree cliffs....
The Valley: though dry farmed, watered by springs (from mountains) and deres and pınars..

At HT, Sazak D. Tekke, Türbe etc...Karapınar...are perennial...don’t dry up. One IMP reason that grazing continues on in HT uplands....

No possibility of irrigation at present.....except for Karahoyük being irrigated from a cistern, from a nearby spring.....(look up name)

Kızılarkaç: about 1162 m.folds are protected by high mountainous zone...deep ravine at the end of Sögütlü pinar offers both protection and water to the folds...
				---------------
HERDING TERMS					
Terminologies for “Use-Area”, “Grazing area”, “Fold”

Izzetin.........AÌIL/AÌILLARI
DAVAR YATAĞI
SIĞIR YATAĞI
ÇOBAN TEPELERİ
YATAK YERI
ARKAÇ
AĞIL ÇESMESİ
MALHÜYÜK
ÇOBANBAYIRI
KUZU BAYIRI
ÖKÜZ OTURTAN
				---------------








