
Came to YH in 1932. Yunan harbinden once yerleşme KKayasının olduğu yerdeymiş. 
13.7.05- 20.7.05

Today we went to Yavuz CY with Gökçe, to start working on the filling out of the HH Architectural Forms we prepared yesterday. We also looked at the oldest house, Ömer Aga’s house to check the drawn plan. 
Two interesting items came up: in the storage/tezeklik area I spotted some old tools used by the grandmother and by the elderly women who in the past adopted Ömer Yavuz, husband of the grandmother, and the first comer of the Yavuz dynasty. There is an upright loom (drawn by Gökçe), carved by hand. There are two poles which have notches for thread tension; they are held together by a horizontal pole which slides into the holes at the top of the uprights.  
Also an iron tilling tool, which was pulled by a pair of oxen—up until 1959.
Many sizes of sieves…the netting made of leather; a wooden fork, an iron  scythe…..

Later on, Mücella Yavuz told me that Faruk and his brother are also separating in their business corporation, just as Feridun and Yüksel did.
Reason is that the brother has a married son with a child now, so expenses are increasing……it will be hard to  estimate each HH’s share.
So, each corporate unit is very careful about the precision of their shares!






27.07.05 (Gökçe interview, continued)

Nasuf Köseoğlu (oldest man in YH- he is 92, as of 2016.)		

SOCIAL and SETTLEMENT HISTORY
EARLY AGRICULTURE
DROUGHT/SURVIVAL

He came to YH in 1932 From Beypazarı at age 13.

Yassıhöyük: Yunan harbinden önce yerleşme KKayasının olduğu yerdeymiş.

	•	Prior to Sakarya War (prior to 1921), YH was at KK.
	•	During Sakarya War went to ŞÖ, some went to ÇK. After the war, villagers, c. 4-10 HHs went back to YH after the War.

	•	(Pre-1930s) At first there were 3 ağas: Hacı Mehmet, Deli Mehmet (husband of two women who adopted Ömer Ağa); Mehmet Ali Kahraman (Sivrihisar Demirci köyünden gelmis). They built the old mosque.
	•	In 1932 there were 12 HHs: 
Hacı Mehmet Tokat; Mehmet Ali Kahraman, (Sivrihisar Demirci köyünden); owner of “Perili Ev”
	Deli Mehmet (Ömer Aganin üvey babası) Beypazarlı; 
	Hasan Çil (Miyasenin babasi; Mihalliç (Eskişehir) 
	Hasan Pekmez (Güssüm’s grandfather);
	Kelleci Mustafa; 
	Cemil Kayran (Ibrahim’s Kayran’s great uncle); 
	Kürt Mehmet (from Kars); 
	Kel Mıstık (Satı Yılmazın kocasının babası); 
	Abdurrahman Kurt; 
	Yusuf Köseoğlu; (Nasuf’s father, from Beypazarı)
	İsmail Kelleci (Halimenin ilk kocası)..
	•	Eski Caminin inşası ilk üç Ağa zamanında olmuş (pre-1930s).
	•	After 1953, Bulgarian and Romanian immigrants came. They were given land for house and field. They introduced the beehive “oven”. They had summer and winter hearths. Inside and in CY.
	•	Hearths were used by “Çıtak” and other settlers.
	•	People bathed in cauldrons (large Metal pot w/2 handles- (kazan);“güsülhane” used only by ağas (also built in Feridun Yavuz’  house).
	•	In the past we dried meat: salted, dried it in the sun, hung it in pantry and used it as we needed it.
meat: salted, dried it in the sun, hung it in pantry and used it as they needed it.

Nasuf Köseoglu (earliest interview) : 8/8/95 from Beypazarı.

He came here in 1932, he was 13 yrs. old. There was 12 HH. There were 3 ağa families, and the rest worked for them. Most people were very poor. 
“ Yevmiye 25 kurustu, ekinin yarımı da 25 kurustu.” We used to plant dark barley which was very productive for feed....we don’t have the seeds anymore.
Used to plant oats for feed, keten, kenevir, cumin, hashish, sesame were all planted. They were not very productive, so we did not continue. Even in irrig. land, it was not productive. I did 50 dönüm of hashish, got 25 teneke
(25x16.5)=412.5 kg. It was only subsistence farming....we butchered our sheep.
(1 metal teneke holds c. 16.5 kg).
There was no extra cash, except the ağas. 
Animal husbandry was very important. Each ağa had 1,500-2,000 sheep.
When did become less important? In 1953, with land reform, grazing land became less, so less sheep. Hacı Mehmet Tokat had 150 cows, horses, donkeys, 1,000 goats and many sheep...(Erdogan’s & Atik’s grandfather).

If animal husbandry could go along with farming, it would be very profitable.
Farming alone has become very, very expensive. 
Goats are not favored anymore. They breed them at hilly places, like Şabanözü, Avşar.  
Cattle farming has been started, but feed is expensive, I don’t think it is too profitable. 
In farming, we don’t count in the cost of labor of the farmer; if we did that there would be almost no profit..
How can you optimize farming here? Only with lots of irrigation..fertilizer should be cheaper.
This land, which is west of Kızlarkayası, used to be very wet, Sakarya used to flood....so there were a lot of Kamıs-- and lots of wild boar-- when water was drained as a result of digging the trench for Sakarya, it opened to farming, flat land, no boars....less of  loss of produce.

Another factor for bad crops was draught-- From 1932-1939. No rain, no wheat. We used to eat the husk of wheat....made bread from it. What saved you?  
What saved us was GOOD NADAS. Plus, if you had animals, you were in good position...we even made our own clothing from buffalo hide.
What about keeping up with increase in population?  We began to sell produce in the market for cash. 
	Farming in the past was very arduous: one walked with the horses or oxen during ploughing, then we took care of the beast of burden, we were very tired-- Ploughing with animal power, we did 2-3 d. of land; with tractor we do 50-80-100 dönüms...also, one couldn’t plough on rocky, hilly terrain...
We bought a tractor in 1949. We also did NADAS (LEAVING LAND FALLOW), otherwise we would not get any crop.. Also, you had to prepare the NADAS very well..In 1942, we already had BIÇER Döğer.. Therefore, in the past  we did the following 
for productivity: 1) crop rotation (one year fasulye, another year wheat); but you cannot rotate wheat with everything); 2) Nadas; 3) Sulu, by means of ark--

For a family of 5, how much land did they need? and how many animals?
Minimum 200 d., 100 d. nadas, 2 cows, 40-50 sheep...this would be a middle class family - There is a place called Çalcı in Aydın-- the growers from there brought kilim, grapes, figs...to exchange for cheese from here - There is a lot of “pekmez” there, one has to eat salty cheese to balance their diet.
They came not only to YH, but to the whole region, on horseback for trade.

IMPORTANT
In the Phyrgian times, there was a big population, occupying a very large area--that means the pop. was big, and farming must have been good--irrigation was probably done with canals, leading from Sakarya. How productive were Phyrgians? There must have been a large labor force. Even though there was no machinery, people must have known to work with primitive tools-- 

But In the past there used to be a lot of snow, from Dec. to April-- in 1890 when the village was in Kızlarkayası. At that time, there was 40 HH.
Then, the village moved at 1920’s to this area...Where Çekirdeksiz village is, it used to be our “Yayla”, grazing land. YH gave land to immigrants to set up a village there. Now, it is the opposite- they are buying land from us, because they are hard workers, and rich. At YH, people can’t cooperate, get along with each other; that’s why we lose.

Then, in contrast, there was a lot of draught from 1944-51, for seven years.
This region was full of trees, juniper and oak.  The Midas tomb was built with junipers from this region. About 5-7 km. from us, there is a mountainous area called Kızıllı where there is oak...also, near Sabanözü, about 10 km. there is still oak. People cut up trees in YH--
Before, tractor, what strategies did you use for dry farming?  NADAS, SOLAK PULLUK for 2 horses; if he had 4 horses, he used Tirenli PULLUK; latter was more efficient....In one day, we could plough 10 d. with the least efficient PULLUK..
In the early  years, sugar beet was not profitable... chemical fertilizer was not available.. water could not be brought in--now, it is much more profitable.

					------------------


	•	Prior to Sakarya War (prior to 1922), YH was at KK.
	•	During the war some went to ŞÖ, others to ÇK.
	•	After the War, the villagers, c. 4-10 HHs settled in YH.
	•	At first there were 3 ağas: Haci Mehmet, Deli Mehmet (husband of two women who adopted Ömer Ağa); Mehmet Ali Kahraman (Sivrihisar Demirci köyünden gelmiş). They built the old mosque.
	•	In 1932 there were 12 HHs: 
	Hacı Mehmet Tokat; 
	Mehmet Ali Kahraman, (Sivrihisar Demirci köyünden); 
	Deli Mehmet (Ömer Ağanın üvey babası) Beypazarlı; 
	Hasan Çil (Miyasenin babasi; Mihalliç; 
	Hasan Pekmez (Güssüm’s grandfather);
	Kelleci Mustafa; 
	Cemil Kayran (Ibrahim’s great uncle); 
	Kürt Mehmet (from Kars); 
	Kel Mıstık (Satı Yılmazın kocasının babası); 
	Abdurrahman Kurt; 
	Yusuf Köseoğlu; (Nasuf’un babası)
	Ismail Kelleci (Halimenin ilk kocası)..
	•	Eski Caminin inşası ilk üç Ağa zamanında olmuş (Deli Mehmet, Mehmet Ali Kahraman, Hacı µehmet Tokat)
	•	After 1953, Bulgarian and Romanian immigrants came. They were given land for house and field. They introduced the beehive “oven” . They had summer and winter hearths. Inside and in CY.
	•	Hearths were used by “Çıtak” and other settlers.
	•	People bathed in cauldrons; “gusulhane” used only by agas 
	•	In. the past they dried meat: salted, dried it in the sun, hung it in pantry and used it as they needed it.




					------------------

