In article <3qgh7u$1pq@netnews.upenn.edu> you write: 
AAnyone able to give me information about Tanabata myth. I am preparing a series of photographs to illustrate this mysth and need to know more details about it. Any personal stories might be helpful. 

I think the myth was inported from China. 

Vega of the Lyra was a weaver dedicated for a god. The name of the star, Shokujo, means a weaving woman. Her lover was a servant caring cows. He also became a star, Altair of the Aquila. Its name, Kengyuu, means a cow puller.

Shokujo was a very good weaver, but after she fell in love with Kengyuu, she neglected her work. So, the god became angry and made the lovers stars. The god put two stars on opposite sides of the Heaven River (the Milky Way), so that the lovers couldn't meet each other. The god, however, was kindhearted so as to let them make a rendevous once a year. The day is July 7, or the star festival.
				---	----	-----	-----



Ömer Şimşek -	very hot, sunny day, 7.30 A.M.7/8/96

VENUE-

He is taking his flock to south of Midas, toward Sarıtaş...with 220 sheep. OF THAT, 65 sheep belong to Süleyman Karagöz.  Max. # you take with a helper? About 1,500-2,000 at a time. I worked at BK for Kazım bey, took 1,800 sheep, in the ‘60s. Took them to Acıkır, Mama deresi, near Medet Mtns. NE of Gordion...Dua tepe is another grazing area...where the Turkish army was set up in the Sakarya War. Doğan’s flock is taken by shepherd Celal, though Doğan is my br-in-law. 
How many in your flock are pregnant? about 40-50...they will give birth in Nov. Gestation period is 5 months.I am now separating the rams until Sept. 1st, so the ewes don’t lamb twice/year..because it is very hot, the lambs don’t survive it. 
So, I prefer 1 lamb/year. 

FEED –

What kind of feed they eat at home? Most important is barley; it is then  mixed with industrial feed (it is also natural: corn, sunflower pulp, sugar beet pulp, rye, oats, cotton pulp....all mixed. I either give it like that, or mix it with barley...mix it with hay..sometimes they eat food remains, too. Like bulghur pilav, salad...
What do the lambs eat? Also, special feed for lambs...like oats, rye, corn, all mixed...
What does one sheep/year eat? Besides grazing? From Dec - March they are fed for 4-5 months..then, in spring, in end of March they graze..For feed, one sheep eats 
For 1 sheep on average  400-500 gr../day...of barley...In addition, hay and feed...If you give only feed, amount is 1.0 kg./sheep per day. Because it is not as nutritious as barley. After April-Dec 15, I don’t give them feed..except for the lambs.
It is not grazing that destroys the grazing land. It is the ploughing and burning of the fields that destroy it. 
The sheep are now in the harvested wheat and barley fieds...remains of grain and stalk..they love to eat the stalk..I am trying to use up this valuable feed from the fields...

After lambing, we sell most of the rams, leave the ewes..no. depends on one’s income.
New Irrigation, is it good for herding? It provides stronger stalk and more water..it isn’t bad for us.  

Talk with Müzeyyen ˆimˆek - Her summer daily cycle :
	Back home shepherd’s wife is constantly processing milk and catching up with the daily activities..Before he left, she milked 120 sheep, prepared his breakfast and his noon meal to send along on the back of the donkey..
-  Feed the rams and the calves, with hay in one hand and barley pail in the other;give them water;
- Lambs, sick sheep, to feed and water..I feed them 3x per day..
- Yoghurt and white cheese making
 How much do you get from one sheep? Now it is less, 1/2 kg. from 3 sheep per day..Normally it is 500 gr. /day.
- Washing, watering the garden, making a meal, making bread (twice a week)
I already finished making macaroni; I still have to do tomato paste. 
Do you make bulghur? No, I buy it.
Niˆâsta making is very arduous; but it is very tasty. Aysun’s mo-in-law sends me bulghur and niˆasta...
Is winter a better time? Yes, we only feed the animals once a day, in the evening, if they go out; if at home, we feed them twice.
How much hay do they eat in the winter? about 5 - 6 tons ..
What about the cow and calf? 50 kg. of feed and some (?) hay for 1 month.Cow has to eat summer and winter. If not fed, there is no milk..If it does not give birth you can milk it for 12 months.. If it had a calf, it nurses for 2 months, then can be milked. There are 2 kinds of cows: holstein is more delicate, gives more milk, but needs more feed.

PEYNIR MAYASI - (ˆirden- Rennet)

Found next to stomach of sheep - First dry it completely. We used to mix egg, chick pea, bean, raisins in a bag.
Put ˆîrden in a bag too in a pot of boiling water...let them boil. also a type of wheat (Göce)....after boiling, until the whole egg, the shell and the yellow are gone, let it cool. It is liquid. In the past the “ebes” used to make them.It is then kept for a year or two; only a spoonful is needed to use as starter for cheese.

