
Atik Tokat YH  History						


13.8.96

Atik Tokat - about social history of village and farming....			

He is 58 years old; he is the son and grandson of very rich landowning aghas..
Hacı Mehmet Ağa- His wife is the daughter of Ömer Yavuz,(Faruk Yavuz’father) brother of Sefer Yavuz..

Social History- by Atik Tokat. Origins of Yassıhöyük

My grandfather died in 1945-46. He was born in 1880. His father was Hacı Atik...he was also one of the 4 families in this village. He came here from Mihallıçık (Eskisehir) Dümrek village. We are Yörüks....my ancestors knew how to herd...I remember the tents...of my great aunt. They used to go to near Bebi (old BK) in summer as yayla with their herds for 3-4 months; in winter they came back to the present YH. 
There was a cemetery at the old village; the new brides used to be taken around the cemetery as a gesture of their respect for their dead ancestors..this custom is no longer practised. 
The past was ruled by the aghas..all other people worked and depended on them. It was a harmonious and cooperative relationship. There was no repression..(Of course, ask this to the workers!)

When the village was still at KK (Kızlarkayası), there were a few Greek HH at Present YH. They had to leave after the war of independence (Sakarya savaşı).

When my greatgrandfather (4 generations ago) lived at KK, Çekirdeksiz was its YAYLA.

Çekirdeksiz village was settled in late 1800’s..In fact, Hacı Atik owned much of it until then. Also, at BK there is a bridge named after him.
The name Tokat - In that region, Hacı Atik built a mill, built a dam and possessed a field of ca. 100 d. And, all our land was eventually accumulated there. With surname legislation, our family got the name of the district. Kayran’s land was in that area, so they got Kayran as their name. My ancestors were aghas...

We had guests; father and GF used to eat with them...Food and bread flowed. We also took care of our workers very well. Vendors would eat and stay here.
At Tokat mvk. we also had sheepfolds-- with ca. 1,500 tiftik. They all came here to be sheared. .Afterwards they were taken back. Lots of men collaborated to shear, from the village, they came with their shears. We also had a sheepfold in front of what is now your dig house, near Arzu’s house...Her husband was brought here ca. 20 years ago, as a shepherd for the Tokat family he had very decent wages. We settled them here. They are both from Kıbrıscık.
Molla Ibrahim, Mehmet Ali Kahraman, Tokat were the main HH and aghas...here..
The first man to make a house here at YH was Hacı Atik..


According to villagers’ accounts, for subsistence a family of 5 needs two hectares of land, (20 dönüm), and 30 sheep plus a modest “surplus”. In upland villages barley production under reasonably good climatic conditions would exceed the amount needed to sustain a household herd; the sale or trade of the surplus could pay for part of the essential needs as feed, salt, medicine, extra labor. (AGS, 2005, p. 78)
Agriculture was secondary in my greatgrandfather time..Herding was primary. Farm hands worked for the aghas, got their share. But mostly, they were shepherds to aghas.
Reason for this village’s lack of harmony and cooperation is because it is very mixed: people are from all over the place-- Haymana, Beypazarı, Bolu, Eskisehir (Sivrihisar)--

The past was ruled by the aghas..all other people worked and depended on them. It was a harmonious and cooperative relationship. There was no repression..(Of course, ask this to the workers!)

DIBEK –

The upper village dibek was brought from city mound by ox-drawn carts in several stages..it was before the excavations...it was put on wooden beams and pulled by 4 oxen, and 2 horses, in 1944-45. The other dibek has been there earlier, may be came from the Kısla Mevkii where the early village was located....Atik’s father was responsible for it, because he liked “old things”..In his house there is also a column base, it looks like hellenistic.
Bulgur was made by “imece” usulü. There was more intimacy then. Bulgur is no longer home-made, because they can buy it from the grocer.  
It used to be washed in Sakarya...now, there is no washing, it goes directly to the factory. It is both laziness, and comfort..
It used to be the harvest was 2 months with hand tools. Now it is 2 weeks at most. There is time...

What is the capacity of these dibeks? About 15-18 kg. We did not fill it up to the brim, so that we could beat it. 
There is also “göce” buğday...it is also beaten, but without having been cooked LIKE BULGUR. Used for Aşûre..We also used dibek for unhusking rice...we used to grow it by the Sakarya. In the Dibek wheat, rice were beaten


COMMERCE –

 People used to come from Beypazarı, exchanged wheat and wool for grapes, watermelon and other fruits..they have good fruit there. They brought it on Sunday with asses, near the mosque...Vendors who came to the village were called “çerçi”; they bought wool, angora wool here....up until 15 years ago (EARLY 1980S). Exchanged it for embroidery thread, beads, etc..
