



(See interviews with Bıyıkoğlu and Yurdagül Uslu 2011)


BEYLİKKÖPRÜ (BK)								19.7.96

Mesut Siler, Süleyman Karakuş

When was it established: at eski Bebi there were 3 families...About 1912 the train station was established; then the village was established here. Train follows the Porsuk, has to pass through here...Bebi is about 3 km. from here.

Beylikköprü:
Pop: 1,500-2,000; 270 HH. 
Area: 30,000 d. Arable land: 20,000 d.	grazing: 10,000 d.
		Irrigated land: ca. 7,000 d. (1/3)
We plant wheat, barley, oats, sugar beet, onion, chick peas, melon....
We sell the barley for feed and beer. Water comes from Sakarya. 

Herding is not much.. Sheep and goats: 1,000;  cattle: 300
Because çoban is expensive..Wool is cheap, milk is cheap..
1 sheep yields about 2 1/2 kg. of wool, that is not much..
We have a vegetable, fruit garden in our courtyards....just for ourselves.
The farthest field is ca. 7 km. not very far.
We rent land from Sarıoba village..also from Tozlu ..
Nearby villages always know each other...we have connections..Also communication is through trade and our central location as the weighing station is imp. for communication.

Mesut Bey: My mother is from Kula, Manisa. She met my father in Istanbul when she was taking care of her brother who was working in Istanbul..She has 4 kids..her husband died when her youngest was 6 months old...
She would have taught the local girls to weave if she had a loom..but her husband discouraged it. There is no weaving or rug making here..So, 1 woman would have introduced her weaving tradition and the Kula-type designs and techniques-- it all would happen through marriage..
This village is getting bigger. Each HH has 30 d. under irrigation. That is not enough.
We need to find work outside of farming.
What is the limit for a good existence? 200 d. (50 d. under irrigation) and 10 cows..  good to have 25 sheep also.

In 1975 there was an uprising here. Workers (originally from Bolu ) fought with the aghas (originally from Sivrihisar). Demanded more money and land. In response, the aghas brought workers from Konya yörüks. .Then, the state stepped in, redistributed it among the landless. Later, in 1976 the Konya yörüks settled down and became landed too. Now, each HH that has been given land will earn the deed after working on it for 25 years.

Mesutun babası Kırım Tatarı idi. Sivrihisara Bulgaristan yolu ile geliyor. It was his 2nd marriage, had 4 kids, in 13 years. But he was very progressive, he introduced the tractor and “ya©murlama sistemi”......to the village.
Marriages take place between BK and Çekirdeksiz..There is Tandır Evi in every house.
There are 20 HH of göçmen from Bulgaria, Romania, here.
BREAD:  somun (göçmen), bazlama (yerli), yufka ekme©i (yörükler yapıyor)
TYPES OF BREAD by ethnicity:  somun (göçmen); bazlama (yerli); yufka ekmeği (yörükler) yapıyor.

CY activities: çapa of garden, ekmek, fowl, dried apricots, jam, (with tezek atesi ) on hearth; eriste kesmek, tarhana, nisasta, bulgur

