

23.7.09 -  Conversation With Frank- “what is good for Gordion is good for Yassıhöyük” (Frank).
Yassihöyük sits on the ancient Phyrgian site, the capital of the Phyrgian kingdom which has been excavated and studied since 1950. In the course of 60 some years many workers from the village and villages in the environs have come and gone to and from work at the excavations. While farming capacity increased 10-fold since 60 years at the expense of decreased herding, new crops and central irrigation system were added to the repertory, including irrigated wheat. Wheat is still the highest yielding crop produced in the region. (As Faruk Yavuz explained it, there is an important BORSA where the quality of each vendors’ wheat is evaluated and the payment is made accordingly- the vendor gets a check which he is able to cash it at the bank right away). Green crops, onion and sugar beet are grown at high cost, requiring a lot of water, electricity, high expenditure, ie. labor intensive/cash intensive. For irrigation, weeding and other manual fieldwork, seasonal laborers are hired from other regions, from Konya, Urfa, Isparta etc..

RE-CONSTRUCTING/REVITALIZING WORLDS--

We discussed various options to Revitalize the Village, and my Role in it-

During my conversations with women this summer, I was told by
some women that they were beginning to realize that their role as the head of all household chores was not satisfying. They needed a new role, to be part of a larger world outside of the home. During a brief meeting with several village women I got the impression that if an outsider, preferably a woman, would “lead the way” the women of YH would follow in working with each other  “cooperatively”. I was asked to lead the way.

Purpose –
To revitalize the village whereby we would be able to establish a closer relationship with the village; 
To provide a sustainable, reusable sources of energy
Income generating market environment so that the villagers do not desert the village, and the activities act as catalyst for bringing women’s cooperative efforts 

How can this be achieved?
This would require an active role on the part of the women, to create, advertise, sell their products. One woman as coordinator  is required, and a Project Director (AGS).

Visible and tangible pieces of work will help to do so.

What are these pieces of work and who might be the players?
First, to put attractive signs in the Museum to advertise the village, to get the visitors- both local and foreign- to take a walk to where the food and handicraft stands are; 
along the way a few traditional mudbrick houses could be visited to meet the villagers and see the interiors;
Players: women- To start with, I would like to meet with some women who I think would be appropriate and willing to participate in setting up a Women’s Group which would develop into a Women’s Cooperative.
a building which is not used currently, preferably one that requires minimal repair, where the cooperative’s activities would be based for sale by village women, and where they could meet on certain days to socialize and discuss their products—
two likely candidates are either the old mosque or the old schoolhouse. (The latter would require more repair than the mosque—see below). 
To create a center to serve as an eco-friendly base, that will utilize solar energy, for drying fruits and vegetables, making bread, jam etc. on a scale for home consumption as well as sale to visitors to the site- These efforts can ultimately develop into a cottage industry-
To experiment with drip irrigated gardening, and greenhouse produced crops—(Abdullah Çavus has already a big vegetable garden which produces and sells in Polatli markets—his irrigation may not be by “damla sulama yöntemi”, although he may know what it is. His veggies can also be marketed in the village)—(Kazim is very knowledgeable about greenhouse building and drip-irrigation)
A venue where solar energy is used to heat water, (we already have sun-heated water for our showers), dry vegetables and fruits

The Old Schoolhouse 
is a solid stone building with 6 rooms, and an a la Turca toilet, a kitchen with an open oven built into the wall, with chimney, and a very large, fenced-in garden. It was built in mid ‘50s.

The Old Mosque

The mosque is a very simple and elegant structure. It is centrally located, very close to a mound (in front of Fadime’s house) and a house that was burned down in the ‘50s. Its stone foundations are still visible. 
No one seemed to know exactly when the old mosque was built. I estimate that it was built between 1910-1920. Like the schoolhouse it is a stone structure, with a hipped roof built of timber beams and terracotta tiles. The tiles must have been added in the ‘50s over either a flat or a hipped roof.  But unlike the schoolhouse, the stone walls are built as dry masonry and plastered and whitewashed. There are even faint traces of blue paint on the white plaster. For some years, it has been filled with garbage, empty coffins and some wash basins. I think the floor boards are destroyed and there is only an uneven earth flooring. So, the floor needs to be put in, possibly a type of cement flooring that would be easy to clean and long-lasting.

What Kind of Local Products Offered for Sale:

Prepared Foods and Handicrafts would be the two categories of items to produce and market-

List of Local Foodstuffs for Sale (to be added on)
Fasulye Konservesi (Bean Conserve)
Fruit marmalade, Jam
Ayran, yoghurt
Baklava
Stuffed, grape leaves (rice and olive oil)
“hösmerim” – made with cream of milk, corn starch, butter, sugar
 (fried) 
Bazlama, gözleme
“Kuru” (cookie made with butter and cream of milk)- it is crunchy and lasts a long time)
“Tursu”
“Manti”
“Tarhana” soup—made with yoghurt, tomato etc., dried in the sun
Macaroni, made and cut by hand
Dried fruits (sour cherry, apricot etc..)
“Un Kurabiyesi”
Lentil Köfte

	Non-Edibles:
	Salvar
	Yemeni
	Patik
	Small pillows (Hand-embroidered and crafted)
	Wool?
	Lace table covering




 List of Women who wish to be Involved (preliminary):

*Bingül Yavuz
*Emine Çelik
M. Ali Güçlü’s sister-in-law
Nuriye Köseoglu (Suna’s sister)
Pinar Atiktig
Sevgi Belge
Güler Kayran
*Mediha Tokat
Safure’s da-in-law
Ümmiye Yavuz
Hatice Öney
Gülay Simsek
*Sibel Köseoglu
*Fatma Yavuz

Women’s Coop.’09-

TO SELL HANDICRAFTS and FOODS
Foods:  Tarhana, turşu, ayran, höşmerim, makarna, bulgur,
Jams (from garden fruits), gözleme, sun-dried fruits and Veggies
		
		Oya Işleri: lace, patik, şal, Yemeni……….to sell wool

TO SHOW HOUSE INTERIORS: 

TO SHOW WORK-SITES: sheep shearing, mudbrick making, macaroni cutting, breadmakinf etc…

VILLAGE VIDEO- SHOWN AT MUSEUM before walking to cooperative

PLAYERS: Coordinator: Bingül Yavuz, Sevgi Belge

Can Utgu
Özlem Orhan
Sevgi Belge
Güler Yılmaz
Pınar Atiktığ  -  0538 761 4037
Güler Kayran – 638 22 02
Hayriye Utgu
Neriman Yılmaz (Satının gelini)
Hatice Öney
Reyhan Avkan
Mürvet Kayran
Duran’ın gelinleri
Canan Yavuz
Gülseren Güçlü
Hatice+Canan+Gülseren+Reyhan
Hedime, Sabriye, Havva


Method to Realize it-

	-To collaborate with Belediye for ideas and funding
	- 
	








