COMMON CEMETERY (Interview, Aug. 2021).





15.8.2021		 VISITING YASSIHÖYÜK- 

DAY OF GOOD-BYES, DAY BEFORE WE LEAVE GORDION.

This morning I went to say good-bye to Pınar Atiktığ (her husband OF 3 years) died a “hero” fighting with PKK and Syrian Kurdish YPG militia
 in Van. Sadly, she returned to YH to her father’s home; unfortunately 1 month later, the father died…..she has a sweet 2 yr. old boy whom she is still nursing. On the walls of her mother’s house are her husband’s pics. everywhere—She is very confused—she was given a car, money, a house in Polatlı and has the privilege of having a job by the State…as the husband was a “Şehit” (died in war), any job they said, because her husband died a “hero”. A day after the funeral ceremony she was put on a plane with her son, all her worldly belongings were also put in a huge wooden box and sent to YH. Her husband Yusuf was buried in İlören village (Eskişehir) where he was born.
Pınar is 32 yrs. old. According to Hatice Öncel; Pınar bought her sibllings’ inheritance of sheep (she paid them their part) she owns them now..I think she has 40 sheep…I wonder why she did that??? Hatice thinks the family is using her money that she got from the Gov’t…

I then went to see Emine, next door to Müzeyyen & Ömer’s house, which is completely empty, they all live in Ankara. Emine has gotten quite old, she has  only 20 sheep, her fa-in-law’s çoban is grazing her sheep. She always smiles when she sees me, and wants to give me “cold ayran”. She has a big vegetable garden and 2 cats. She complained about the drought. I asked her about Fatma Nine who was very elderly,  5 yrs ago- she died, her husband had died long ago—He was also a minor craftsman, he designed a manual coffee grinder, he had a limp, she said. Since they did not have any children their house and a very big courtyard were inherited by his nephew (amca çocukları) who is Hidayet Karagöz, who is married to Safure. Hidayet is the son of a rich farmer (now dead), so is Safure whose rich  father has been dead for 15 yrs.

Then, I went to see Metin Öncel and Hatice—gave them the piece of paper with instructions to graze his sheep and goats next year on MM (Naomi’s instruct.)

From there, it is very close to go to the Gordion Museum. Spoke to İbrahim (guard of the museum) to let Metin on MM with his herd of sheep and goats, so as to increase plants on MM to percent erosion.  



COMMON CEMETERY

İbrahim led me to Mehmet Ali Güçlü, his house is next to the Gendarme post, to find out if he knew about the Common Cemetery which I will include in my ethnoarch. Article. It is c. 500 m. SW of MM, behind the Museum—nearby at North Ridge there are 2 small tumuli (H, I). He said the area of the excavation for the Common Cemetery was in and behind Duran Adanur’s courtyard. Now there are houses in the CY built by his 4 sons (Cihan, İlhami, Durmuş and another son?) they all live in new houses built recently, also have a big KERPİÇ STORAGE and a huge pile of straw for animal feed which is where the cemetery was partially. 
Duran and his wife Havva died 6-7 yrs ago.
Duran had built a DOMED OVEN at the entrance to his CY. Since his death the Oven has been disposed of, only the stones of the foundation remain (see pic).
 CY has been transformed with modern houses (but long modern houses in which 4 families live now)—Duran’s house also had an addition to his original house.(see pic.)

Common cemetery, after excavation had been the area where children played, slided down, people carried away the earth for building or other purposes.
