			VERY IMPORTANT SOCIAL/HIST. INFO.
			Good interview with Mükerrem Karagözoğlu
2004 Notes : June 19 – 21st.
Social History, Kına Ceremony, Karagöz aile, Duran Adanur 

Milking is continuing at a higher level this year than the last. In fact a milk storage structure is being built for the village, so that the pick-up truck does not have to go from house to house every day. It is in the open space across from the Kayran house, below the main road. (I have to find out which HH’s have how many milk cows? )
Two deaths this year: Süleyman Karagöz and Arzu Kocadag. 

Bahar Atiktig is engaged to a truck driver from outside the village;
Gülay was engaged for 2 years; she is dis-engaged; Nilüfer Kocadag (Isa’s daughter) is divorced. The father kept the child. Now she is back at her father’s house. She is very depressed, without a child at her father’s house.
Zekeriya Utku and wife have a baby girl of 10 days old.

There was a wedding at Hasan Yaman’s house: his older son got married to his cousin (teyze’s daughter) who was born in Germany (like Safure’s da-in-law). She is 4 years older than the groom.That evening was “kına gecesi” for the man. It was unusual for the bride to be there also. Since she does not live in Turkey, she also came. She had been married before and has a son. The bride and groom came arm-in-arm to the courtyard where chairs were set up for the guests—mainly women sitting down, men standing up. Men danced with men to live music—traditional dances in pairs and in groups. Women watched, gossiped, socialized. I met all the women and men I knew, shook hands, kissed on 2 cheeks.
Young girls were excited to be there, as they get a chance to see and be seen in a festive mood by boys of the village. 
	According to Duran Atanur,  Hasan’s son had no regular work; they also do not own land…his father is a shepherd. But the son does not want to be a shepherd. So, hopefully he will find a job in Germany. The bride works in a factory there.

Kına Ceremony - The bride was wearing a white, short dress; the groom a regular dark suit. Over his suit was a green embroidered shawl. They walked from the house together arm-in-arm to the front of the chairs. The bride sat in the front row in the spectators’ chair. She is blond, tall, good-looking and has a serious face.
He was seated in the center of the courtyard next to his brother. Their father was standing next to them shooing the little boys from getting too close, with the “hoca”. 
Soon a young man walked to the center stage, holding up a tray of kına on which were lit candles. Almost like a birthday cake. That was beautiful. Some people with video cameras walked nearer to the inner circle.
(Unfortunately I was then still learning to use the camera, so I did not bring it). The lit-up candles were very effective. The groom blew off the candles,
music stopped, the hoca started a prayer session while another relative smeared henna in the palm of the groom. The hand was then fitted with a RED GLOVE. He danced with his red glove and his green shawl all night long to the music of the steppes of Central Anatolia.
An important announcement was made soon after the prayers; that no shooting into the air was allowed.
I went there with Pembe and her family, including Önder who sat on a wall talking with the young men and smoking profusely.

Cin-Cin is doing very well; in early morning she stands with  gusto, at the open gate of the house, accepting each person’s petting. Then she selects a shady spot , under an apricot tree. If somebody gives her a biscuit she is happily amused. Otherwise she waits for her  dinner all day—leftovers from dinner. They are generally nutritious remainders—lots of yoghurt, few morsels of meat, bread, green beans!





23.6.2004
Yesterday I went to see Duran, the shepherd. He is now retired, had  open heart surgery last winter, so he is somewhat out of operation. He is 64 years old, a tall, handsome man from Yazıca village in Bolu. He was a shepherd since 13 yrs. old. He said he really wanted to study, his math was very good, but death of his father prevented him from continuing. So he only has elementary school education. 

I got some estimated figures for sheep and goats at YH from Duran. The pop. has gone down almost 50%, from 2000 to c. 1,000 sheep, and goats went down from 45-15-20. The decrease is made up by much milk yielding  Holstein cows. Cow numbers is about the same, c. 250, but the type is changed, from local cows to Holsteins. So, Milk yield is increased from 8-10 kg. to 25 kg/cow/day. The cost/profit for both types of animals should be calculated.
Each cow costs about $2,000…and they consume a lot of feed in winter. In summer there is a little grazing, but grazing land is very dry steppe grass.
Another source food for the herds is the harvested fields, anız. The grains that fall in the field are picked up by the 

Duran does not think that milk economy is a solid base for this village, because of their high maintenance. He thinks eventually there will not be so much demand for milk and milk products.. Who knows? He says sheep is a better investment. It is ready cash; and if you lose 1 or two it does not hurt so much. But if you lose a cow, that can lead you to bankruptcy.
So there is more risk involved with cows. (more on the subject- Feridun Yavuz interview in 2003).

His three sons live in their respective houses in the courtyard. Duran has c. 550 d. of land and 200 sheep. So he is very well off. His sons work on the land, and they hire a shepherd to herd the sheep.




June 24, 2004 (Transcription)
Karagözoglu -

I went to the house of Hasan (Eda) Karagözoglu yesterday. The mo-in-law, Mükerrem was there. Her husband Süleyman had died 6 months ago. So she is still in mourning. I went today to talk to her, she was at Ayse’s (da-in-law)
House, at namaz with her one 9 year-old granddaughter . She teaches both grandkids to pray and namaz. She is also a Hacı. She is 72 yrs. old. Her husband was 82. They were married 55 yrs. She is from Beypazarı village, Dibören. He was from Devören. (like Ömer Simsek). She is related to Müzeyyen Simsek, they are nieces to each other. (Teyze kızı).

Mükerrem is a delicately built woman; on a thin face, a small bulbous nose and big eyes which are shy. She is a tall, handsome woman. Neatly dressed.
She likes to say that she does not know anything; her life is stay in her flat in Polatlı rather than with her sons..they have been doing it with her husband for 22 years. So, at 50 she retired from village work. Süleyman was 60.
He went to mosque everyday, she cooked and took care of him and her garden. It was a very peaceful time, she said. After all that hard work, they earned it.

Mükerrem’s father came to work for Mehmet Aga. Her husband came much later from Devören to work for Ömer Aga, Sefer’s employer. 
We were 4 kids, my brothers and sister died as adults. When I married Süleyman  he had nothing, just a pair of pants. He came in as “iç güveysi”
 (So, Mükerrem’s father and her husband (from next generation) worked for the same 2 Ağas, (Mehmet and Ömer Ağas), who themselves, had been inheritors of Ağalık earlier…)
The Continuity of “Ağalık” system was long lived!)
And we started to work for other people. In 1950 there was land distribution, we got 190 d. of land…after my brothers and father died Süleyman bought all of the family’s shares. “Hacı was very hard working and very intelligent.
Ondan Allah razı olsun, nurda yatsın, kızları çıkardı, oglanları everdi, hepsine çok iyi bir hayat verdi. Hacı usta oldu, bense çırak oldum. We first lived where Hoca lives now. When my parents were getting old we came to their courtyard (where all the sons live now) and built a tiny house for us. Courtyard  was a very big place….She and .Süleyman continued to build sheep pens, cow sheds, storage etc. in the courtyard”.
After the parents died they moved to parents’ house (now Burhan’s). As the sons got married he built a house for each one. But Hidayet wanted to be on his own so he got his share from his father. The other two remained as corporate families. (Hasan married twice; Ayse is the second wife. His first wife died from cancer in 1994—6 months later he remarried and now has 2 daughters).
Mükerrem continued, “My two daughters are married and live in Polatlı. I have 12 grandchildren; I even have great grandchildren. While I can take care of myself I like to live by myself. I visit my sons and grandsons but that’s all. 
There was no entertainment for us. We visited a few neighbors, the mosque but did not entertain. But we went to Hac. He went before me once; I said to him, that we had both worked together, lived together, so he should take me to Hac. He said I might fall sick, but despite that he took me to Hac..
Hocalara danisti, onlar da götüreceksin demisler, o da beni götürdü. Allah da beni korudu. O hasta oldu, ben olmadım.

I was born in Beypazarı. My father was a farmer. One day we piled up all our bedding on a bull-driven cart, and we got on it and came to YH.
(The old mosque was there then….so the mosque must be at least 70 yrs. old). Reason my father came to this courtyard because it was close to relatives from Kıbrıscık. 

Benim hic aklım ermezdi, Ömer Aga’nın ailesi bize aracı oldu, beni istediler. Öylece evlendik. Dügün köyde oldu”. 

A Day in her Life –starting in 1950s. “Koyun, inek sağardım; harmana giderdim; tarlaya az gittim, bebek büyüttüm. 5 inek, 100’den fazla koyun..Sağacı tuttum, sütcü gelirdi, satardık. Ben hiç pazara gitmedim. O getirirdi ben yerdim.
Beni hep korudu. Atlarla, kagnı arabası ile tarlaya giderdi. Sabah Gordion’da isci, aksamüstü ise tarlaya giderdi, sabah gün doguncaya kadar.
Ben de ona bir çift at hazırlardım, samanını verirdim, gelince yemegini yer, hemen tarlaya giderdi. Yemegini yanına verirdim. Ben de çocuk, yemek, süt sagmak, peynir, yag yapardım. Ben ilk gelin oldugumda ekmek bile yapmazdım. Sonra anamdan herseyi ogrendim. Kısın da bebelere, adama çorap ördüm.
Ben okumadım, dede  askerde okumayı bellemis. 
Süleyman was a “yarıcı” for my father, and other people also. Bize tarla verilinceye kadar, hep çobanlık, bekarlık yarıcılık yaptı.
We shared everything with my parents, as an extended family.
---------------------
(Following is copied from 1996 interview with Süleyman and Hasan Karagöz)

	Hasan Karagöz --When my father was here, he was the manager, he held the purse strings, we all ate together...so we saved a lot. But now there are 3 separate household expenditures.
It is important to know where to spend, when to spend..
more so than just earning.
Their father came from Kıbrıscık, Bolu..he had nothing, came to YH to work on Yavuz family land..married, got a little bit of land and increased it in time, by very hard work.
(This is the same story for most of the “Çıtak”/”Kıslak”, richer families at YH)

Next day I spoke with the father, Süleyman Köseoğlu..he said when he came to YH there were more women than men...he went to the mosque courtyard at Polatlı as other workers to ask for work..he was hired to plough land..do odd tasks...then, he had 3 women suitors..He chose the one from Beypazarı, because they are like people from near Kıbrıscık, so similar to them, women are known to be skilled, hard-working and thrifty.
And, she turned out to be right. When she became quite sick with meningitis, husband paid much money to get her treated by the best doctors and hospital..then, decided to move away from the village to Polatlı, so she could be at rest and he could retire to spend more time together...clever man.. He is a short, stocky man with beady blue eyes..very articulate and soft-spoken. 
About herding...he said it used to be that one sheep was as productive as 1 dönüm of land; ie. equiv. of 150-200 kg. of wheat.
--------------------
(continue with Mükerrem’s interview) ’04.

“Fatma nine’s husband was my husband’s brother; he was a very industrious, skillful man. He also worked for the Americans. He repaired tools. He had no land. He used to sell eggs, small fry man. He was Süleyman’s brother.
“Yarıcılık” yapardı. His one leg was short”.

Crops: wheat and barley. Sold surplus wheat. Did some bostan. We also rented the Village garden with F. Çoban (Safure’s father) and did some sugar beet, and apple trees. (So sugar beet started about 30-35 yrs. ago.) Both Çoban and Karagözoğlu were leaders in starting it).

Fadime Tokat bizden sonra evlendi. O Saray’dan geldi. Benden büyüktü.

We were neighbors with Çoban Fazlı and Doğan family (latter is my aunt’s family). My son  is married  to his daughter (Safure).We socialized with only those people. 

I had meningitis, stayed in hospital for 20 days. I was very ill. After that we stayed in Polatlı, did not return to the village.

Süleyman died in Polatlı, but was buried in the village. This was his “mekan”. He worked for his children. He was also thrifty. He did not spend money on frivolous things. 
The two were together every single day, except when she was in the hospital. She always did what he asked. She is very strong, though. She is a very patient woman, and independent.

June 29, 2004

We have been working with Banu (from METU Preservation) on mapping the village. We first scanned the aerial photo of 1960s, the topo. Map on which the sketch of the village was juxtaposed (again 1960s). Based on those two we generated two more maps: one shows the boundaries of each courtyard with names of owners; 
2)  boundaries of each courtyard with a sketch of main buildings in each, Istanbul-Ankara road, some village paths and public buildings. 
These latter maps represent the present  view of the village—with new buildings in courtyards, commonly used buildings (mosque, school, cemetery, health clinic etc.) left from demolished houses etc… some open spaces in the village.   Now we need to interpret the changes that have taken place since 1960’s. 

1.7.’04

ODTU students started to work on the village library and its surroundings.
They are measuring the building, taking rölöve,  measuring trenches in front of the building to put in a foundation for a kiosk as part of the guest house complex. These are the 1st year students with their teachers.
Another group is working with me (Restoration students) and Seda (3rd yr architecture) drawing plans, sections of houses, and details of rooms such as niches, built-in cupboards and shelves  ) For starters we selected houses of Emin Çetinkaya, Feridun Yavuz with their courtyards and Hatice  

3.7.’04

Barley is being harvested. I was driving through Basrı today, the harvesters were busily at work. The big trucks are already transporting barley along the Polatlı-Ankara road. In another 10 days, wheat will be harvested. 

At Kezban’s house I was shown Bahar’s trousseau . She was very proud to show all the clothing, bedding, shoes, many bohças full of embroidered covers that her in-laws gave to her. There are also oyalı yemeni and patik which are given to her which she will distribute among her own relatives.
There are also bohças full of clothing from in-laws as presents to Bahar’s family. Among the presents there are gold bangles and gold coins which were given to her at the engagement as “takı”. 
Bahar’s fiance is a long-distance truck driver from a village in Eskisehir. His parents are of Tatar origin. Bahar is very happy. For the engagement she rented a beautiful dress (paid by her fa-in-law). Her parents are not financially in good shape—Muharrem bought several milk cows, sheep and is doing agriculture.
His eldest son Ömür, his wife and Pınar are working in the fields while Bahar and Muharrem milk the cows, (Muharrem with machine, Bahar by hand), and Kezban takes care of two grandchildren. She and Bahar cook.

After marriage Bahar moves in with her husband to a single house near Eskisehir. Her marriage is definitely a grand opportunity for her to go up in social and financial status. Otherwise she would be living in a hovel with her parents and sis-in-laws and nieces and nephews. She would still be milking cows and digging in onion fields! 
Marriage will be sometime after November, as she will be waiting for her brother who is presently doing his military service.  
A few days later when I visited Kezban’s house I found Pınar and the da-in-law milking the cows in the courtyard..grandchildren being tended by Ekrem’s wife who is Muharrem’s sister (hala). She lives one house away.
(Cooperation).. Pınar is no longer at school, she is very well developed at 16, and will probably get married after her sister and brother. In the meantime she helps her mother (I think that is why they did not send her to school).
She is very well behaved, I gave her and sister and sis-in-law presents on the occasion of Bahar’s marriage. Also some hand-me-downs that Han sent…and a dress of mine to Pınar. They were very happy. (See video)


4.7.’04

I showed the 1965 Yassıhöyük Village book to Fadime, Feridun Yavuz and Muammer to see if they would recognize some of the villagers living at that time. Feridun made the most correct identifications of people and houses; next was Fadime –she recognized her father and began to reminisce her past—how big and brave she was. Once she and her friends saw a Yayın fish near Sakarya dam…it was alive, a 50 kg. fish. They were scared of its size, and thought it was some evil spirit. So they called the men who finally beat it up and they heaved it up on a donkey to carry it back home (in Saray village). That night there was a feast for the whole village…she was followed by men with great admiration while she was pulling on the donkey with the fish to move along…

Both Feridun and Bedia (his wife) were a bit surprised that their pictures were not in. I told them that now the students are taking pictures and drawing their house so their grandchildren will look at the next book with their pictures, as we are doing today.

Village girls from Afyon came by to Feridun’s house as we were looking at the book. They are migrant workers who stayed here 2 months, they stayed at a rented ahır at Erdogan’s house. They complained they did not have water and electricity. Conditions were very bad. Where they live in Afyon there is no work. So they do migrant labor in Izmir, Aydın collecting cotton etc…Girls complained with tears in their eyes that they would not be sent to school…how they would love to become teachers or nurses! 
When they heard their Çavus driving the truck to pick them up, they were so joyous…Bedia gave them some good drinking water…they all piled up on the truck…their clothing beads were very striking and…lemon yellow hand-knit sweaters, purple velvet salvar etc…Bedia made them at home to sit in her courtyard while they talked to us..
Next day they were still in the village..apparently the Çavus said they could go to the Museum as he had promised them. But of course he did not do anything about that. So I called Ibrahim at the Museum and asked him to show them around….all 20 of them. They did see the Museum and later left happily,,they thanked me and invited me to Afyon.


