HAMIDIYE	’08 at 1,500 m. elevation							6.7.08

About 90 km. from YH, 1 ½ hrs of driving.

Today Hamidiye köyü is a village of a few elderly folks, almost forgotten mountain village, at c. 1500 m. surrounded by a pine and oak forest.. It has the most beautiful green forest landscape and the smell of pines. It has a boundary with Ahirözü. I had gone there in ’97. At that time the Muhtar was Sakir Karatas—the family was fairly large, with his brother and other members of the family they did herding and a little bit of agriculture (see my notes). Some of the old houses have been repaired and added on. But they have their “somun oven” on the side of each house, under a lean-to. (I photographed)

Muhtar: Sakir Karatas, Mehmet Karatas
Ahirözü has boundary with Hamidiye



By way of Kiranharman, passed through Sazilar-Omerler-Gencali (kaolin 

Today Hamidiye köyü is a village of a few elderly folks, almost forgotten mountain village, at c. 1500 m. surrounded by a pine and oak forest.. It has the most beautifu green forest landscape and the smell of pines. It has a boundary with Ahirözü. I had gone there in ’97. At that time  Muhtar was Sakir Karatas—the family was fairly large, with his brother and other members of the family they did herding and a little bit of agriculture (see my notes—1500 sheep). Some of the old houses have been repaired and added on. But they have their “somun oven” on the side of each house, under a lean-to. (I photographed)

Evin, her students and I started driving west via Sazilar, Ömerler-Gençali,
Passed kaolin and stone quarries- Small stony fields, dry agriculture- 
On Gençali hills are many herds, at 1050 m., sheep and Angora goat.. After passing Gençali, landscape changes from the stark, bare, hilly peaks to scrub oak and pine. Deeply cut valley below, also wide wheat and barley fields. Dry farming, so the stalks are still short and not ripe. 
About 1 km. downhill from Gençali there is a fork, we pass a huge pile of quarried stones, we go uphill c. 2 km. and come to another fork—arrow shows Saray köy to the right. We took the left one to go to Ahirözü direction to get to Hamidiye- On the road mulberry trees.. 
Past Ahirözü, deep broken up valley, red soil-, past through Üçbasli köy (1300 m), we made a left climbed for 4 km over a village road-- which marks the beginning of the forest at 1300 m. Growing chick pea, dry wheat, irrigated sugar beet. We made a left turn from Üçbasli, climbed a hill  and after 4 km. came to Hamidiye, at 1500 m. Oak and apricot trees..pine reaches 5-12 m.

Hamidiye was established in 1903, its mosque dates to 1913. Mostly Bulgarian and Romanian. The elderly population is now in Eskisehir, but they come in the summer. Altogether there are about 15-20 HH. In winter only 4 HH. Muhtar is Ergün Tuna, the youngest of 3 brothers whom I 
photographed. The oldest is Akif Tuna, 84 yrs. old. The family is Bulgarian, all with blue eyes- In the past some men worked in the Kaolin industry and chromimum mines..
Some people from Hamidiye went to ÇK to settle, among them was the old herder that I had interviewed in ÇK—Mustafa Yildirim (see my notes, ÇK’97)

Among the crops they grew chick pea and some corn. 
No animals except for 6 milk cows—

When I was there in ’97, a young girl with a shy manner, had shown me her black pointed baby goat (kid), I had photographed her. This time I showed
Some slides of those early images- I was told the girl, Emrah Karatas had committed suicide! She fled with a man who intended to marry her, but her family disowned her—Emrah took her own life..I am very saddened by that..

All members except one moved to Eskisehir. Tuna family has several grandchildren, one is at Hacettepe U. another girl is at Lise at 13 yrs. Old.
The old grandma keeps making her Tarhana, the da-in-law and mo-in-law still make çörek and bazlama in the Tandir house, in a portable oven, not in open fire anymore!

South and west of Ahirözü and east of Sarayköy, a very large expanse
(South: 40 km, W: 30 km, E: 25 km toward Sakarya and across from it) mny folds are marked on the 1:100 000 map, from 800 – 1100 m. especially overlooking Porsuk and Sakarya.




