WATER – YH and environs 						13.8.08

Sakarya is so low that we can walk from one bank to another- it is not even flowing—it is pretty still..the green plants are suffering-

There are 2 systems of irrigating at YH from Sakarya: 
1) State irrigation
2) Private (dinamo)
Users are supposed to pay both for electricity and water- but since many don’t pay for electricity, the elec. Is cut off. So, people either do dry farming Or use dinamo privately- which they did till 2023, in 2024 no water at Sakarya. So, farmers drill deep wells, collect water into pipes to navigate irrigating their fields
3) İçme suyu- comes from Basrı ; (also same source for Köseler, Tekke,
BK, Tozlu villages).


-Today we went to Kiranharman (KH), ÇK, with Evin.
She took some bird’s eye view photos of the villages from the minaret.
Erdoğan Family (Safiye, Salim, Hanife). Remzi Yılmaz ’ son married Safiye’s daughter.

-We met the new Muhtar’s wife of KH; this is a sleepy village.
No herds, except for 1 family; but they have some milk cows.

She was checking some somun she had put in the oven, the bee hive shaped oven—She takes out the metal bread pans with a big two-pronged fork, checks them (I have photos)- She is related to the old lady Safiye whom I also visited this time–she was the one whom I had pictured with coffee cup fortune telling pose several years ago- she is Bulgarian and the aunt of Muhtar’s wife-
They are both heavy, Safiye has blue beady smiling eyes- 
Also, Remzi’s son at YH married Safiye’s daughter—I think that preference is due to Remzi’s wife also being a “Göçmen” from ÇK and her parents were Bulgarian- 

All villages are suffering from water shortages. Strangely enough, villagers are not paying for water, but they are supposed to pay for electricity on individual basis- However, a lot of them owe electricity money to the State as well.

There are 3 types of water available to the villages: 
State Irrigation works for YH and Sabanözü for watering fields-from Sakarya
Individual water extraction from Sakarya by “Dinamo” 
Piped in water to houses through underground pipes which is laid by the State Waterworks at no cost—it comes to YH from Basri; also, to Köseler, Tekke, Beylikköprü, Tozlu; it gets stored in storage for the whole village—then, it is up to each village to distribute it equitably to HHs.
To ÇK, piped water comes from Kizilli Çiftligi (Medet Kasi Dag springs), by gravity, from 7 km. distance-
But water is becoming scarce—in the past 70 tons of water would fill in Storage in 10 hours. Now it takes 24 hrs.

What to do? Not to waste it by “yagmurlama”—or other ways like watering large gardens constantly—But some trees in dig house and other gardens are dried up—especially plums, apricots which are the
	Best grown fruit trees in this soil.

At YH onions and sugar beets are in danger of not growing well due to water shortage..


16.7.08
Speaking with Feridun Yavuz about water, on the side of the road, near his sons’ houses.
He says the only way to save the situation is to decide and inform individual farmers the amount of water that can be used in each village during the growth season, and enforce it—this can only be done by the Municipal or State hydrology experts., it is not an easy task- First, the amount of land, and the amount of water needed for the land have to be calculated—next, individual farmers should pay for their allocations- this way one village will not exploit  more than another- As it stands YH has not had water for 3 days from Sakarya while people who use “dinamo” to bring up water have been able to draw from it—(those who use dinamo pay for electricity, but still don’t pay for water)..

There are 2 types of water available to the villages: 
State Irrigation works
Water drawn from Sakarya w/ individual motors 


